.. _development_process_intro:

Introduction
============

Executive summary
-----------------

The rest of this section covers the scope of the kernel development process
and the kinds of frustrations that developers and their employers can
encounter there.  There are a great many reasons why kernel code should be
merged into the official ("mainline") kernel, including automatic
availability to users, community support in many forms, and the ability to
influence the direction of kernel development.  Code contributed to the
Linux kernel must be made available under a GPL-compatible license.

:ref:`development_process` introduces the development process, the kernel
release cycle, and the mechanics of the merge window.  The various phases in
the patch development, review, and merging cycle are covered.  There is some
discussion of tools and mailing lists.  Developers wanting to get started
with kernel development are encouraged to track down and fix bugs as an
initial exercise.

:ref:`development_early_stage` covers early-stage project planning, with an
emphasis on involving the development community as soon as possible.

:ref:`development_coding` is about the coding process; several pitfalls which
have been encountered by other developers are discussed.  Some requirements for
patches are covered, and there is an introduction to some of the tools
which can help to ensure that kernel patches are correct.

:ref:`development_posting` talks about the process of posting patches for
review. To be taken seriously by the development community, patches must be
properly formatted and described, and they must be sent to the right place.
Following the advice in this section should help to ensure the best
possible reception for your work.

:ref:`development_followthrough` covers what happens after posting patches; the
job is far from done at that point.  Working with reviewers is a crucial part
of the development process; this section offers a number of tips on how to
avoid problems at this important stage.  Developers are cautioned against
assuming that the job is done when a patch is merged into the mainline.

:ref:`development_advancedtopics` introduces a couple of "advanced" topics:
managing patches with git and reviewing patches posted by others.

:ref:`development_conclusion` concludes the document with pointers to sources
for more information on kernel development.

What this document is about
---------------------------

The Linux kernel, at over 8 million lines of code and well over 1000
contributors to each release, is one of the largest and most active free
software projects in existence.  Since its humble beginning in 1991, this
kernel has evolved into a best-of-breed operating system component which
runs on pocket-sized digital music players, desktop PCs, the largest
supercomputers in existence, and all types of systems in between.  It is a
robust, efficient, and scalable solution for almost any situation.

With the growth of Linux has come an increase in the number of developers
(and companies) wishing to participate in its development.  Hardware
vendors want to ensure that Linux supports their products well, making
those products attractive to Linux users.  Embedded systems vendors, who
use Linux as a component in an integrated product, want Linux to be as
capable and well-suited to the task at hand as possible.  Distributors and
other software vendors who base their products on Linux have a clear
interest in the capabilities, performance, and reliability of the Linux
kernel.  And end users, too, will often wish to change Linux to make it
better suit their needs.

One of the most compelling features of Linux is that it is accessible to
these developers; anybody with the requisite skills can improve Linux and
influence the direction of its development.  Proprietary products cannot
offer this kind of openness, which is a characteristic of the free software
process.  But, if anything, the kernel is even more open than most other
free software projects.  A typical three-month kernel development cycle can
involve over 1000 developers working for more than 100 different companies
(or for no company at all).

Working with the kernel development community is not especially hard.  But,
that notwithstanding, many potential contributors have experienced
difficulties when trying to do kernel work.  The kernel community has
evolved its own distinct ways of operating which allow it to function
smoothly (and produce a high-quality product) in an environment where
thousands of lines of code are being changed every day.  So it is not
surprising that Linux kernel development process differs greatly from
proprietary development methods.

The kernel's development process may come across as strange and
intimidating to new developers, but there are good reasons and solid
experience behind it.  A developer who does not understand the kernel
community's ways (or, worse, who tries to flout or circumvent them) will
have a frustrating experience in store.  The development community, while
being helpful to those who are trying to learn, has little time for those
who will not listen or who do not care about the development process.

It is hoped that those who read this document will be able to avoid that
frustrating experience.  There is a lot of material here, but the effort
involved in reading it will be repaid in short order.  The development
community is always in need of developers who will help to make the kernel
better; the following text should help you - or those who work for you -
join our community.

Credits
-------

This document was written by Jonathan Corbet, corbet@lwn.net.  It has been
improved by comments from Johannes Berg, James Berry, Alex Chiang, Roland
Dreier, Randy Dunlap, Jake Edge, Jiri Kosina, Matt Mackall, Arthur Marsh,
Amanda McPherson, Andrew Morton, Andrew Price, Tsugikazu Shibata, and
Jochen Voß.

This work was supported by the Linux Foundation; thanks especially to
Amanda McPherson, who saw the value of this effort and made it all happen.

The importance of getting code into the mainline
------------------------------------------------

Some companies and developers occasionally wonder why they should bother
learning how to work with the kernel community and get their code into the
mainline kernel (the "mainline" being the kernel maintained by Linus
Torvalds and used as a base by Linux distributors).  In the short term,
contributing code can look like an avoidable expense; it seems easier to
just keep the code separate and support users directly.  The truth of the
matter is that keeping code separate ("out of tree") is a false economy.

As a way of illustrating the costs of out-of-tree code, here are a few
relevant aspects of the kernel development process; most of these will be
discussed in greater detail later in this document.  Consider:

- Code which has been merged into the mainline kernel is available to all
  Linux users.  It will automatically be present on all distributions which
  enable it.  There is no need for driver disks, downloads, or the hassles
  of supporting multiple versions of multiple distributions; it all just
  works, for the developer and for the user.  Incorporation into the
  mainline solves a large number of distribution and support problems.

- While kernel developers strive to maintain a stable interface to user
  space, the internal kernel API is in constant flux.  The lack of a stable
  internal interface is a deliberate design decision; it allows fundamental
  improvements to be made at any time and results in higher-quality code.
  But one result of that policy is that any out-of-tree code requires
  constant upkeep if it is to work with new kernels.  Maintaining
  out-of-tree code requires significant amounts of work just to keep that
  code working.

  Code which is in the mainline, instead, does not require this work as the
  result of a simple rule requiring any developer who makes an API change
  to also fix any code that breaks as the result of that change.  So code
  which has been merged into the mainline has significantly lower
  maintenance costs.

- Beyond that, code which is in the kernel will often be improved by other
  developers.  Surprising results can come from empowering your user
  community and customers to improve your product.

- Kernel code is subjected to review, both before and after merging into
  the mainline.  No matter how strong the original developer's skills are,
  this review process invariably finds ways in which the code can be
  improved.  Often review finds severe bugs and security problems.  This is
  especially true for code which has been developed in a closed
  environment; such code benefits strongly from review by outside
  developers.  Out-of-tree code is lower-quality code.

- Participation in the development process is your way to influence the
  direction of kernel development.  Users who complain from the sidelines
  are heard, but active developers have a stronger voice - and the ability
  to implement changes which make the kernel work better for their needs.

- When code is maintained separately, the possibility that a third party
  will contribute a different implementation of a similar feature always
  exists.  Should that happen, getting your code merged will become much
  harder - to the point of impossibility.  Then you will be faced with the
  unpleasant alternatives of either (1) maintaining a nonstandard feature
  out of tree indefinitely, or (2) abandoning your code and migrating your
  users over to the in-tree version.

- Contribution of code is the fundamental action which makes the whole
  process work.  By contributing your code you can add new functionality to
  the kernel and provide capabilities and examples which are of use to
  other kernel developers.  If you have developed code for Linux (or are
  thinking about doing so), you clearly have an interest in the continued
  success of this platform; contributing code is one of the best ways to
  help ensure that success.

All of the reasoning above applies to any out-of-tree kernel code,
including code which is distributed in proprietary, binary-only form.
There are, however, additional factors which should be taken into account
before considering any sort of binary-only kernel code distribution.  These
include:

- The legal issues around the distribution of proprietary kernel modules
  are cloudy at best; quite a few kernel copyright holders believe that
  most binary-only modules are derived products of the kernel and that, as
  a result, their distribution is a violation of the GNU General Public
  license (about which more will be said below).  Your author is not a
  lawyer, and nothing in this document can possibly be considered to be
  legal advice.  The true legal status of closed-source modules can only be
  determined by the courts.  But the uncertainty which haunts those modules
  is there regardless.

- Binary modules greatly increase the difficulty of debugging kernel
  problems, to the point that most kernel developers will not even try.  So
  the distribution of binary-only modules will make it harder for your
  users to get support from the community.

- Support is also harder for distributors of binary-only modules, who must
  provide a version of the module for every distribution and every kernel
  version they wish to support.  Dozens of builds of a single module can
  be required to provide reasonably comprehensive coverage, and your users
  will have to upgrade your module separately every time they upgrade their
  kernel.

- Everything that was said above about code review applies doubly to
  closed-source code.  Since this code is not available at all, it cannot
  have been reviewed by the community and will, beyond doubt, have serious
  problems.

Makers of embedded systems, in particular, may be tempted to disregard much
of what has been said in this section in the belief that they are shipping
a self-contained product which uses a frozen kernel version and requires no
more development after its release.  This argument misses the value of
widespread code review and the value of allowing your users to add
capabilities to your product.  But these products, too, have a limited
commercial life, after which a new version must be released.  At that
point, vendors whose code is in the mainline and well maintained will be
much better positioned to get the new product ready for market quickly.

Licensing
---------

Code is contributed to the Linux kernel under a number of licenses, but all
code must be compatible with version 2 of the GNU General Public License
(GPLv2), which is the license covering the kernel distribution as a whole.
In practice, that means that all code contributions are covered either by
GPLv2 (with, optionally, language allowing distribution under later
versions of the GPL) or the three-clause BSD license.  Any contributions
which are not covered by a compatible license will not be accepted into the
kernel.

Copyright assignments are not required (or requested) for code contributed
to the kernel.  All code merged into the mainline kernel retains its
original ownership; as a result, the kernel now has thousands of owners.

One implication of this ownership structure is that any attempt to change
the licensing of the kernel is doomed to almost certain failure.  There are
few practical scenarios where the agreement of all copyright holders could
be obtained (or their code removed from the kernel).  So, in particular,
there is no prospect of a migration to version 3 of the GPL in the
foreseeable future.

It is imperative that all code contributed to the kernel be legitimately
free software.  For that reason, code from anonymous (or pseudonymous)
contributors will not be accepted.  All contributors are required to "sign
off" on their code, stating that the code can be distributed with the
kernel under the GPL.  Code which has not been licensed as free software by
its owner, or which risks creating copyright-related problems for the
kernel (such as code which derives from reverse-engineering efforts lacking
proper safeguards) cannot be contributed.

Questions about copyright-related issues are common on Linux development
mailing lists.  Such questions will normally receive no shortage of
answers, but one should bear in mind that the people answering those
questions are not lawyers and cannot provide legal advice.  If you have
legal questions relating to Linux source code, there is no substitute for
talking with a lawyer who understands this field.  Relying on answers
obtained on technical mailing lists is a risky affair.
.. _development_process:

How the development process works
=================================

Linux kernel development in the early 1990's was a pretty loose affair,
with relatively small numbers of users and developers involved.  With a
user base in the millions and with some 2,000 developers involved over the
course of one year, the kernel has since had to evolve a number of
processes to keep development happening smoothly.  A solid understanding of
how the process works is required in order to be an effective part of it.

The big picture
---------------

The kernel developers use a loosely time-based release process, with a new
major kernel release happening every two or three months.  The recent
release history looks like this:

	======  =================
	5.0	March 3, 2019
	5.1	May 5, 2019
	5.2	July 7, 2019
	5.3	September 15, 2019
	5.4	November 24, 2019
	5.5	January 6, 2020
	======  =================

Every 5.x release is a major kernel release with new features, internal
API changes, and more.  A typical release can contain about 13,000
changesets with changes to several hundred thousand lines of code.  5.x is
the leading edge of Linux kernel development; the kernel uses a
rolling development model which is continually integrating major changes.

A relatively straightforward discipline is followed with regard to the
merging of patches for each release.  At the beginning of each development
cycle, the "merge window" is said to be open.  At that time, code which is
deemed to be sufficiently stable (and which is accepted by the development
community) is merged into the mainline kernel.  The bulk of changes for a
new development cycle (and all of the major changes) will be merged during
this time, at a rate approaching 1,000 changes ("patches," or "changesets")
per day.

(As an aside, it is worth noting that the changes integrated during the
merge window do not come out of thin air; they have been collected, tested,
and staged ahead of time.  How that process works will be described in
detail later on).

The merge window lasts for approximately two weeks.  At the end of this
time, Linus Torvalds will declare that the window is closed and release the
first of the "rc" kernels.  For the kernel which is destined to be 5.6,
for example, the release which happens at the end of the merge window will
be called 5.6-rc1.  The -rc1 release is the signal that the time to
merge new features has passed, and that the time to stabilize the next
kernel has begun.

Over the next six to ten weeks, only patches which fix problems should be
submitted to the mainline.  On occasion a more significant change will be
allowed, but such occasions are rare; developers who try to merge new
features outside of the merge window tend to get an unfriendly reception.
As a general rule, if you miss the merge window for a given feature, the
best thing to do is to wait for the next development cycle.  (An occasional
exception is made for drivers for previously-unsupported hardware; if they
touch no in-tree code, they cannot cause regressions and should be safe to
add at any time).

As fixes make their way into the mainline, the patch rate will slow over
time.  Linus releases new -rc kernels about once a week; a normal series
will get up to somewhere between -rc6 and -rc9 before the kernel is
considered to be sufficiently stable and the final release is made.
At that point the whole process starts over again.

As an example, here is how the 5.4 development cycle went (all dates in
2019):

	==============  ===============================
	September 15	5.3 stable release
	September 30	5.4-rc1, merge window closes
	October 6	5.4-rc2
	October 13	5.4-rc3
	October 20	5.4-rc4
	October 27	5.4-rc5
	November 3	5.4-rc6
	November 10	5.4-rc7
	November 17	5.4-rc8
	November 24	5.4 stable release
	==============  ===============================

How do the developers decide when to close the development cycle and create
the stable release?  The most significant metric used is the list of
regressions from previous releases.  No bugs are welcome, but those which
break systems which worked in the past are considered to be especially
serious.  For this reason, patches which cause regressions are looked upon
unfavorably and are quite likely to be reverted during the stabilization
period.

The developers' goal is to fix all known regressions before the stable
release is made.  In the real world, this kind of perfection is hard to
achieve; there are just too many variables in a project of this size.
There comes a point where delaying the final release just makes the problem
worse; the pile of changes waiting for the next merge window will grow
larger, creating even more regressions the next time around.  So most 5.x
kernels go out with a handful of known regressions though, hopefully, none
of them are serious.

Once a stable release is made, its ongoing maintenance is passed off to the
"stable team," currently Greg Kroah-Hartman. The stable team will release
occasional updates to the stable release using the 5.x.y numbering scheme.
To be considered for an update release, a patch must (1) fix a significant
bug, and (2) already be merged into the mainline for the next development
kernel. Kernels will typically receive stable updates for a little more
than one development cycle past their initial release. So, for example, the
5.2 kernel's history looked like this (all dates in 2019):

	==============  ===============================
	July 7		5.2 stable release
	July 14		5.2.1
	July 21		5.2.2
	July 26		5.2.3
	July 28		5.2.4
	July 31  	5.2.5
	...		...
	October 11	5.2.21
	==============  ===============================

5.2.21 was the final stable update of the 5.2 release.

Some kernels are designated "long term" kernels; they will receive support
for a longer period.  Please refer to the following link for the list of active
long term kernel versions and their maintainers:

	https://www.kernel.org/category/releases.html

The selection of a kernel for long-term support is purely a matter of a
maintainer having the need and the time to maintain that release.  There
are no known plans for long-term support for any specific upcoming
release.


The lifecycle of a patch
------------------------

Patches do not go directly from the developer's keyboard into the mainline
kernel.  There is, instead, a somewhat involved (if somewhat informal)
process designed to ensure that each patch is reviewed for quality and that
each patch implements a change which is desirable to have in the mainline.
This process can happen quickly for minor fixes, or, in the case of large
and controversial changes, go on for years.  Much developer frustration
comes from a lack of understanding of this process or from attempts to
circumvent it.

In the hopes of reducing that frustration, this document will describe how
a patch gets into the kernel.  What follows below is an introduction which
describes the process in a somewhat idealized way.  A much more detailed
treatment will come in later sections.

The stages that a patch goes through are, generally:

 - Design.  This is where the real requirements for the patch - and the way
   those requirements will be met - are laid out.  Design work is often
   done without involving the community, but it is better to do this work
   in the open if at all possible; it can save a lot of time redesigning
   things later.

 - Early review.  Patches are posted to the relevant mailing list, and
   developers on that list reply with any comments they may have.  This
   process should turn up any major problems with a patch if all goes
   well.

 - Wider review.  When the patch is getting close to ready for mainline
   inclusion, it should be accepted by a relevant subsystem maintainer -
   though this acceptance is not a guarantee that the patch will make it
   all the way to the mainline.  The patch will show up in the maintainer's
   subsystem tree and into the -next trees (described below).  When the
   process works, this step leads to more extensive review of the patch and
   the discovery of any problems resulting from the integration of this
   patch with work being done by others.

-  Please note that most maintainers also have day jobs, so merging
   your patch may not be their highest priority.  If your patch is
   getting feedback about changes that are needed, you should either
   make those changes or justify why they should not be made.  If your
   patch has no review complaints but is not being merged by its
   appropriate subsystem or driver maintainer, you should be persistent
   in updating the patch to the current kernel so that it applies cleanly
   and keep sending it for review and merging.

 - Merging into the mainline.  Eventually, a successful patch will be
   merged into the mainline repository managed by Linus Torvalds.  More
   comments and/or problems may surface at this time; it is important that
   the developer be responsive to these and fix any issues which arise.

 - Stable release.  The number of users potentially affected by the patch
   is now large, so, once again, new problems may arise.

 - Long-term maintenance.  While it is certainly possible for a developer
   to forget about code after merging it, that sort of behavior tends to
   leave a poor impression in the development community.  Merging code
   eliminates some of the maintenance burden, in that others will fix
   problems caused by API changes.  But the original developer should
   continue to take responsibility for the code if it is to remain useful
   in the longer term.

One of the largest mistakes made by kernel developers (or their employers)
is to try to cut the process down to a single "merging into the mainline"
step.  This approach invariably leads to frustration for everybody
involved.

How patches get into the Kernel
-------------------------------

There is exactly one person who can merge patches into the mainline kernel
repository: Linus Torvalds. But, for example, of the over 9,500 patches
which went into the 2.6.38 kernel, only 112 (around 1.3%) were directly
chosen by Linus himself. The kernel project has long since grown to a size
where no single developer could possibly inspect and select every patch
unassisted. The way the kernel developers have addressed this growth is
through the use of a lieutenant system built around a chain of trust.

The kernel code base is logically broken down into a set of subsystems:
networking, specific architecture support, memory management, video
devices, etc.  Most subsystems have a designated maintainer, a developer
who has overall responsibility for the code within that subsystem.  These
subsystem maintainers are the gatekeepers (in a loose way) for the portion
of the kernel they manage; they are the ones who will (usually) accept a
patch for inclusion into the mainline kernel.

Subsystem maintainers each manage their own version of the kernel source
tree, usually (but certainly not always) using the git source management
tool.  Tools like git (and related tools like quilt or mercurial) allow
maintainers to track a list of patches, including authorship information
and other metadata.  At any given time, the maintainer can identify which
patches in his or her repository are not found in the mainline.

When the merge window opens, top-level maintainers will ask Linus to "pull"
the patches they have selected for merging from their repositories.  If
Linus agrees, the stream of patches will flow up into his repository,
becoming part of the mainline kernel.  The amount of attention that Linus
pays to specific patches received in a pull operation varies.  It is clear
that, sometimes, he looks quite closely.  But, as a general rule, Linus
trusts the subsystem maintainers to not send bad patches upstream.

Subsystem maintainers, in turn, can pull patches from other maintainers.
For example, the networking tree is built from patches which accumulated
first in trees dedicated to network device drivers, wireless networking,
etc.  This chain of repositories can be arbitrarily long, though it rarely
exceeds two or three links.  Since each maintainer in the chain trusts
those managing lower-level trees, this process is known as the "chain of
trust."

Clearly, in a system like this, getting patches into the kernel depends on
finding the right maintainer.  Sending patches directly to Linus is not
normally the right way to go.


Next trees
----------

The chain of subsystem trees guides the flow of patches into the kernel,
but it also raises an interesting question: what if somebody wants to look
at all of the patches which are being prepared for the next merge window?
Developers will be interested in what other changes are pending to see
whether there are any conflicts to worry about; a patch which changes a
core kernel function prototype, for example, will conflict with any other
patches which use the older form of that function.  Reviewers and testers
want access to the changes in their integrated form before all of those
changes land in the mainline kernel.  One could pull changes from all of
the interesting subsystem trees, but that would be a big and error-prone
job.

The answer comes in the form of -next trees, where subsystem trees are
collected for testing and review.  The older of these trees, maintained by
Andrew Morton, is called "-mm" (for memory management, which is how it got
started).  The -mm tree integrates patches from a long list of subsystem
trees; it also has some patches aimed at helping with debugging.

Beyond that, -mm contains a significant collection of patches which have
been selected by Andrew directly.  These patches may have been posted on a
mailing list, or they may apply to a part of the kernel for which there is
no designated subsystem tree.  As a result, -mm operates as a sort of
subsystem tree of last resort; if there is no other obvious path for a
patch into the mainline, it is likely to end up in -mm.  Miscellaneous
patches which accumulate in -mm will eventually either be forwarded on to
an appropriate subsystem tree or be sent directly to Linus.  In a typical
development cycle, approximately 5-10% of the patches going into the
mainline get there via -mm.

The current -mm patch is available in the "mmotm" (-mm of the moment)
directory at:

	https://www.ozlabs.org/~akpm/mmotm/

Use of the MMOTM tree is likely to be a frustrating experience, though;
there is a definite chance that it will not even compile.

The primary tree for next-cycle patch merging is linux-next, maintained by
Stephen Rothwell.  The linux-next tree is, by design, a snapshot of what
the mainline is expected to look like after the next merge window closes.
Linux-next trees are announced on the linux-kernel and linux-next mailing
lists when they are assembled; they can be downloaded from:

	https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/next/

Linux-next has become an integral part of the kernel development process;
all patches merged during a given merge window should really have found
their way into linux-next some time before the merge window opens.


Staging trees
-------------

The kernel source tree contains the drivers/staging/ directory, where
many sub-directories for drivers or filesystems that are on their way to
being added to the kernel tree live.  They remain in drivers/staging while
they still need more work; once complete, they can be moved into the
kernel proper.  This is a way to keep track of drivers that aren't
up to Linux kernel coding or quality standards, but people may want to use
them and track development.

Greg Kroah-Hartman currently maintains the staging tree.  Drivers that
still need work are sent to him, with each driver having its own
subdirectory in drivers/staging/.  Along with the driver source files, a
TODO file should be present in the directory as well.  The TODO file lists
the pending work that the driver needs for acceptance into the kernel
proper, as well as a list of people that should be Cc'd for any patches to
the driver.  Current rules require that drivers contributed to staging
must, at a minimum, compile properly.

Staging can be a relatively easy way to get new drivers into the mainline
where, with luck, they will come to the attention of other developers and
improve quickly.  Entry into staging is not the end of the story, though;
code in staging which is not seeing regular progress will eventually be
removed.  Distributors also tend to be relatively reluctant to enable
staging drivers.  So staging is, at best, a stop on the way toward becoming
a proper mainline driver.


Tools
-----

As can be seen from the above text, the kernel development process depends
heavily on the ability to herd collections of patches in various
directions.  The whole thing would not work anywhere near as well as it
does without suitably powerful tools.  Tutorials on how to use these tools
are well beyond the scope of this document, but there is space for a few
pointers.

By far the dominant source code management system used by the kernel
community is git.  Git is one of a number of distributed version control
systems being developed in the free software community.  It is well tuned
for kernel development, in that it performs quite well when dealing with
large repositories and large numbers of patches.  It also has a reputation
for being difficult to learn and use, though it has gotten better over
time.  Some sort of familiarity with git is almost a requirement for kernel
developers; even if they do not use it for their own work, they'll need git
to keep up with what other developers (and the mainline) are doing.

Git is now packaged by almost all Linux distributions.  There is a home
page at:

	https://git-scm.com/

That page has pointers to documentation and tutorials.

Among the kernel developers who do not use git, the most popular choice is
almost certainly Mercurial:

	https://www.selenic.com/mercurial/

Mercurial shares many features with git, but it provides an interface which
many find easier to use.

The other tool worth knowing about is Quilt:

	https://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/quilt/

Quilt is a patch management system, rather than a source code management
system.  It does not track history over time; it is, instead, oriented
toward tracking a specific set of changes against an evolving code base.
Some major subsystem maintainers use quilt to manage patches intended to go
upstream.  For the management of certain kinds of trees (-mm, for example),
quilt is the best tool for the job.


Mailing lists
-------------

A great deal of Linux kernel development work is done by way of mailing
lists.  It is hard to be a fully-functioning member of the community
without joining at least one list somewhere.  But Linux mailing lists also
represent a potential hazard to developers, who risk getting buried under a
load of electronic mail, running afoul of the conventions used on the Linux
lists, or both.

Most kernel mailing lists are hosted at kernel.org; the master list can
be found at:

	https://subspace.kernel.org

There are lists hosted elsewhere; please check the MAINTAINERS file for
the list relevant for any particular subsystem.

The core mailing list for kernel development is, of course, linux-kernel.
This list is an intimidating place to be; volume can reach 500 messages per
day, the amount of noise is high, the conversation can be severely
technical, and participants are not always concerned with showing a high
degree of politeness.  But there is no other place where the kernel
development community comes together as a whole; developers who avoid this
list will miss important information.

There are a few hints which can help with linux-kernel survival:

- Have the list delivered to a separate folder, rather than your main
  mailbox.  One must be able to ignore the stream for sustained periods of
  time.

- Do not try to follow every conversation - nobody else does.  It is
  important to filter on both the topic of interest (though note that
  long-running conversations can drift away from the original subject
  without changing the email subject line) and the people who are
  participating.

- Do not feed the trolls.  If somebody is trying to stir up an angry
  response, ignore them.

- When responding to linux-kernel email (or that on other lists) preserve
  the Cc: header for all involved.  In the absence of a strong reason (such
  as an explicit request), you should never remove recipients.  Always make
  sure that the person you are responding to is in the Cc: list.  This
  convention also makes it unnecessary to explicitly ask to be copied on
  replies to your postings.

- Search the list archives (and the net as a whole) before asking
  questions.  Some developers can get impatient with people who clearly
  have not done their homework.

- Use interleaved ("inline") replies, which makes your response easier to
  read. (i.e. avoid top-posting -- the practice of putting your answer above
  the quoted text you are responding to.) For more details, see
  :ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <interleaved_replies>`.

- Ask on the correct mailing list.  Linux-kernel may be the general meeting
  point, but it is not the best place to find developers from all
  subsystems.

The last point - finding the correct mailing list - is a common place for
beginning developers to go wrong.  Somebody who asks a networking-related
question on linux-kernel will almost certainly receive a polite suggestion
to ask on the netdev list instead, as that is the list frequented by most
networking developers.  Other lists exist for the SCSI, video4linux, IDE,
filesystem, etc. subsystems.  The best place to look for mailing lists is
in the MAINTAINERS file packaged with the kernel source.


Getting started with Kernel development
---------------------------------------

Questions about how to get started with the kernel development process are
common - from both individuals and companies.  Equally common are missteps
which make the beginning of the relationship harder than it has to be.

Companies often look to hire well-known developers to get a development
group started.  This can, in fact, be an effective technique.  But it also
tends to be expensive and does not do much to grow the pool of experienced
kernel developers.  It is possible to bring in-house developers up to speed
on Linux kernel development, given the investment of a bit of time.  Taking
this time can endow an employer with a group of developers who understand
the kernel and the company both, and who can help to train others as well.
Over the medium term, this is often the more profitable approach.

Individual developers are often, understandably, at a loss for a place to
start.  Beginning with a large project can be intimidating; one often wants
to test the waters with something smaller first.  This is the point where
some developers jump into the creation of patches fixing spelling errors or
minor coding style issues.  Unfortunately, such patches create a level of
noise which is distracting for the development community as a whole, so,
increasingly, they are looked down upon.  New developers wishing to
introduce themselves to the community will not get the sort of reception
they wish for by these means.

Andrew Morton gives this advice for aspiring kernel developers

::

	The #1 project for all kernel beginners should surely be "make sure
	that the kernel runs perfectly at all times on all machines which
	you can lay your hands on".  Usually the way to do this is to work
	with others on getting things fixed up (this can require
	persistence!) but that's fine - it's a part of kernel development.

(https://lwn.net/Articles/283982/).

In the absence of obvious problems to fix, developers are advised to look
at the current lists of regressions and open bugs in general.  There is
never any shortage of issues in need of fixing; by addressing these issues,
developers will gain experience with the process while, at the same time,
building respect with the rest of the development community.
.. _development_early_stage:

Early-stage planning
====================

When contemplating a Linux kernel development project, it can be tempting
to jump right in and start coding.  As with any significant project,
though, much of the groundwork for success is best laid before the first
line of code is written.  Some time spent in early planning and
communication can save far more time later on.


Specifying the problem
----------------------

Like any engineering project, a successful kernel enhancement starts with a
clear description of the problem to be solved.  In some cases, this step is
easy: when a driver is needed for a specific piece of hardware, for
example.  In others, though, it is tempting to confuse the real problem
with the proposed solution, and that can lead to difficulties.

Consider an example: some years ago, developers working with Linux audio
sought a way to run applications without dropouts or other artifacts caused
by excessive latency in the system.  The solution they arrived at was a
kernel module intended to hook into the Linux Security Module (LSM)
framework; this module could be configured to give specific applications
access to the realtime scheduler.  This module was implemented and sent to
the linux-kernel mailing list, where it immediately ran into problems.

To the audio developers, this security module was sufficient to solve their
immediate problem.  To the wider kernel community, though, it was seen as a
misuse of the LSM framework (which is not intended to confer privileges
onto processes which they would not otherwise have) and a risk to system
stability.  Their preferred solutions involved realtime scheduling access
via the rlimit mechanism for the short term, and ongoing latency reduction
work in the long term.

The audio community, however, could not see past the particular solution
they had implemented; they were unwilling to accept alternatives.  The
resulting disagreement left those developers feeling disillusioned with the
entire kernel development process; one of them went back to an audio list
and posted this:

	There are a number of very good Linux kernel developers, but they
	tend to get outshouted by a large crowd of arrogant fools. Trying
	to communicate user requirements to these people is a waste of
	time. They are much too "intelligent" to listen to lesser mortals.

(https://lwn.net/Articles/131776/).

The reality of the situation was different; the kernel developers were far
more concerned about system stability, long-term maintenance, and finding
the right solution to the problem than they were with a specific module.
The moral of the story is to focus on the problem - not a specific solution
- and to discuss it with the development community before investing in the
creation of a body of code.

So, when contemplating a kernel development project, one should obtain
answers to a short set of questions:

 - What, exactly, is the problem which needs to be solved?

 - Who are the users affected by this problem?  Which use cases should the
   solution address?

 - How does the kernel fall short in addressing that problem now?

Only then does it make sense to start considering possible solutions.


Early discussion
----------------

When planning a kernel development project, it makes great sense to hold
discussions with the community before launching into implementation.  Early
communication can save time and trouble in a number of ways:

 - It may well be that the problem is addressed by the kernel in ways which
   you have not understood.  The Linux kernel is large and has a number of
   features and capabilities which are not immediately obvious.  Not all
   kernel capabilities are documented as well as one might like, and it is
   easy to miss things.  Your author has seen the posting of a complete
   driver which duplicated an existing driver that the new author had been
   unaware of.  Code which reinvents existing wheels is not only wasteful;
   it will also not be accepted into the mainline kernel.

 - There may be elements of the proposed solution which will not be
   acceptable for mainline merging.  It is better to find out about
   problems like this before writing the code.

 - It's entirely possible that other developers have thought about the
   problem; they may have ideas for a better solution, and may be willing
   to help in the creation of that solution.

Years of experience with the kernel development community have taught a
clear lesson: kernel code which is designed and developed behind closed
doors invariably has problems which are only revealed when the code is
released into the community.  Sometimes these problems are severe,
requiring months or years of effort before the code can be brought up to
the kernel community's standards.  Some examples include:

 - The Devicescape network stack was designed and implemented for
   single-processor systems.  It could not be merged into the mainline
   until it was made suitable for multiprocessor systems.  Retrofitting
   locking and such into code is a difficult task; as a result, the merging
   of this code (now called mac80211) was delayed for over a year.

 - The Reiser4 filesystem included a number of capabilities which, in the
   core kernel developers' opinion, should have been implemented in the
   virtual filesystem layer instead.  It also included features which could
   not easily be implemented without exposing the system to user-caused
   deadlocks.  The late revelation of these problems - and refusal to
   address some of them - has caused Reiser4 to stay out of the mainline
   kernel.

 - The AppArmor security module made use of internal virtual filesystem
   data structures in ways which were considered to be unsafe and
   unreliable.  This concern (among others) kept AppArmor out of the
   mainline for years.

In each of these cases, a great deal of pain and extra work could have been
avoided with some early discussion with the kernel developers.


Who do you talk to?
-------------------

When developers decide to take their plans public, the next question will
be: where do we start?  The answer is to find the right mailing list(s) and
the right maintainer.  For mailing lists, the best approach is to look in
the MAINTAINERS file for a relevant place to post.  If there is a suitable
subsystem list, posting there is often preferable to posting on
linux-kernel; you are more likely to reach developers with expertise in the
relevant subsystem and the environment may be more supportive.

Finding maintainers can be a bit harder.  Again, the MAINTAINERS file is
the place to start.  That file tends to not always be up to date, though,
and not all subsystems are represented there.  The person listed in the
MAINTAINERS file may, in fact, not be the person who is actually acting in
that role currently.  So, when there is doubt about who to contact, a
useful trick is to use git (and "git log" in particular) to see who is
currently active within the subsystem of interest.  Look at who is writing
patches, and who, if anybody, is attaching Signed-off-by lines to those
patches.  Those are the people who will be best placed to help with a new
development project.

The task of finding the right maintainer is sometimes challenging enough
that the kernel developers have added a script to ease the process:

::

	.../scripts/get_maintainer.pl

This script will return the current maintainer(s) for a given file or
directory when given the "-f" option.  If passed a patch on the
command line, it will list the maintainers who should probably receive
copies of the patch.  This is the preferred way (unlike "-f" option) to get the
list of people to Cc for your patches.  There are a number of options
regulating how hard get_maintainer.pl will search for maintainers; please be
careful about using the more aggressive options as you may end up including
developers who have no real interest in the code you are modifying.

If all else fails, talking to Andrew Morton can be an effective way to
track down a maintainer for a specific piece of code.


When to post?
-------------

If possible, posting your plans during the early stages can only be
helpful.  Describe the problem being solved and any plans that have been
made on how the implementation will be done.  Any information you can
provide can help the development community provide useful input on the
project.

One discouraging thing which can happen at this stage is not a hostile
reaction, but, instead, little or no reaction at all.  The sad truth of the
matter is (1) kernel developers tend to be busy, (2) there is no shortage
of people with grand plans and little code (or even prospect of code) to
back them up, and (3) nobody is obligated to review or comment on ideas
posted by others.  Beyond that, high-level designs often hide problems
which are only revealed when somebody actually tries to implement those
designs; for that reason, kernel developers would rather see the code.

If a request-for-comments posting yields little in the way of comments, do
not assume that it means there is no interest in the project.
Unfortunately, you also cannot assume that there are no problems with your
idea.  The best thing to do in this situation is to proceed, keeping the
community informed as you go.


Getting official buy-in
-----------------------

If your work is being done in a corporate environment - as most Linux
kernel work is - you must, obviously, have permission from suitably
empowered managers before you can post your company's plans or code to a
public mailing list.  The posting of code which has not been cleared for
release under a GPL-compatible license can be especially problematic; the
sooner that a company's management and legal staff can agree on the posting
of a kernel development project, the better off everybody involved will be.

Some readers may be thinking at this point that their kernel work is
intended to support a product which does not yet have an officially
acknowledged existence.  Revealing their employer's plans on a public
mailing list may not be a viable option.  In cases like this, it is worth
considering whether the secrecy is really necessary; there is often no real
need to keep development plans behind closed doors.

That said, there are also cases where a company legitimately cannot
disclose its plans early in the development process.  Companies with
experienced kernel developers may choose to proceed in an open-loop manner
on the assumption that they will be able to avoid serious integration
problems later.  For companies without that sort of in-house expertise, the
best option is often to hire an outside developer to review the plans under
a non-disclosure agreement.  The Linux Foundation operates an NDA program
designed to help with this sort of situation; more information can be found
at:

    https://www.linuxfoundation.org/nda/

This kind of review is often enough to avoid serious problems later on
without requiring public disclosure of the project.
.. _development_coding:

Getting the code right
======================

While there is much to be said for a solid and community-oriented design
process, the proof of any kernel development project is in the resulting
code.  It is the code which will be examined by other developers and merged
(or not) into the mainline tree.  So it is the quality of this code which
will determine the ultimate success of the project.

This section will examine the coding process.  We'll start with a look at a
number of ways in which kernel developers can go wrong.  Then the focus
will shift toward doing things right and the tools which can help in that
quest.


Pitfalls
---------

Coding style
************

The kernel has long had a standard coding style, described in
:ref:`Documentation/process/coding-style.rst <codingstyle>`.  For much of
that time, the policies described in that file were taken as being, at most,
advisory.  As a result, there is a substantial amount of code in the kernel
which does not meet the coding style guidelines.  The presence of that code
leads to two independent hazards for kernel developers.

The first of these is to believe that the kernel coding standards do not
matter and are not enforced.  The truth of the matter is that adding new
code to the kernel is very difficult if that code is not coded according to
the standard; many developers will request that the code be reformatted
before they will even review it.  A code base as large as the kernel
requires some uniformity of code to make it possible for developers to
quickly understand any part of it.  So there is no longer room for
strangely-formatted code.

Occasionally, the kernel's coding style will run into conflict with an
employer's mandated style.  In such cases, the kernel's style will have to
win before the code can be merged.  Putting code into the kernel means
giving up a degree of control in a number of ways - including control over
how the code is formatted.

The other trap is to assume that code which is already in the kernel is
urgently in need of coding style fixes.  Developers may start to generate
reformatting patches as a way of gaining familiarity with the process, or
as a way of getting their name into the kernel changelogs - or both.  But
pure coding style fixes are seen as noise by the development community;
they tend to get a chilly reception.  So this type of patch is best
avoided.  It is natural to fix the style of a piece of code while working
on it for other reasons, but coding style changes should not be made for
their own sake.

The coding style document also should not be read as an absolute law which
can never be transgressed.  If there is a good reason to go against the
style (a line which becomes far less readable if split to fit within the
80-column limit, for example), just do it.

Note that you can also use the ``clang-format`` tool to help you with
these rules, to quickly re-format parts of your code automatically,
and to review full files in order to spot coding style mistakes,
typos and possible improvements. It is also handy for sorting ``#includes``,
for aligning variables/macros, for reflowing text and other similar tasks.
See the file :ref:`Documentation/dev-tools/clang-format.rst <clangformat>`
for more details.

Some basic editor settings, such as indentation and line endings, will be
set automatically if you are using an editor that is compatible with
EditorConfig. See the official EditorConfig website for more information:
https://editorconfig.org/

Abstraction layers
******************

Computer Science professors teach students to make extensive use of
abstraction layers in the name of flexibility and information hiding.
Certainly the kernel makes extensive use of abstraction; no project
involving several million lines of code could do otherwise and survive.
But experience has shown that excessive or premature abstraction can be
just as harmful as premature optimization.  Abstraction should be used to
the level required and no further.

At a simple level, consider a function which has an argument which is
always passed as zero by all callers.  One could retain that argument just
in case somebody eventually needs to use the extra flexibility that it
provides.  By that time, though, chances are good that the code which
implements this extra argument has been broken in some subtle way which was
never noticed - because it has never been used.  Or, when the need for
extra flexibility arises, it does not do so in a way which matches the
programmer's early expectation.  Kernel developers will routinely submit
patches to remove unused arguments; they should, in general, not be added
in the first place.

Abstraction layers which hide access to hardware - often to allow the bulk
of a driver to be used with multiple operating systems - are especially
frowned upon.  Such layers obscure the code and may impose a performance
penalty; they do not belong in the Linux kernel.

On the other hand, if you find yourself copying significant amounts of code
from another kernel subsystem, it is time to ask whether it would, in fact,
make sense to pull out some of that code into a separate library or to
implement that functionality at a higher level.  There is no value in
replicating the same code throughout the kernel.


#ifdef and preprocessor use in general
**************************************

The C preprocessor seems to present a powerful temptation to some C
programmers, who see it as a way to efficiently encode a great deal of
flexibility into a source file.  But the preprocessor is not C, and heavy
use of it results in code which is much harder for others to read and
harder for the compiler to check for correctness.  Heavy preprocessor use
is almost always a sign of code which needs some cleanup work.

Conditional compilation with #ifdef is, indeed, a powerful feature, and it
is used within the kernel.  But there is little desire to see code which is
sprinkled liberally with #ifdef blocks.  As a general rule, #ifdef use
should be confined to header files whenever possible.
Conditionally-compiled code can be confined to functions which, if the code
is not to be present, simply become empty.  The compiler will then quietly
optimize out the call to the empty function.  The result is far cleaner
code which is easier to follow.

C preprocessor macros present a number of hazards, including possible
multiple evaluation of expressions with side effects and no type safety.
If you are tempted to define a macro, consider creating an inline function
instead.  The code which results will be the same, but inline functions are
easier to read, do not evaluate their arguments multiple times, and allow
the compiler to perform type checking on the arguments and return value.


Inline functions
****************

Inline functions present a hazard of their own, though.  Programmers can
become enamored of the perceived efficiency inherent in avoiding a function
call and fill a source file with inline functions.  Those functions,
however, can actually reduce performance.  Since their code is replicated
at each call site, they end up bloating the size of the compiled kernel.
That, in turn, creates pressure on the processor's memory caches, which can
slow execution dramatically.  Inline functions, as a rule, should be quite
small and relatively rare.  The cost of a function call, after all, is not
that high; the creation of large numbers of inline functions is a classic
example of premature optimization.

In general, kernel programmers ignore cache effects at their peril.  The
classic time/space tradeoff taught in beginning data structures classes
often does not apply to contemporary hardware.  Space *is* time, in that a
larger program will run slower than one which is more compact.

More recent compilers take an increasingly active role in deciding whether
a given function should actually be inlined or not.  So the liberal
placement of "inline" keywords may not just be excessive; it could also be
irrelevant.


Locking
*******

In May, 2006, the "Devicescape" networking stack was, with great
fanfare, released under the GPL and made available for inclusion in the
mainline kernel.  This donation was welcome news; support for wireless
networking in Linux was considered substandard at best, and the Devicescape
stack offered the promise of fixing that situation.  Yet, this code did not
actually make it into the mainline until June, 2007 (2.6.22).  What
happened?

This code showed a number of signs of having been developed behind
corporate doors.  But one large problem in particular was that it was not
designed to work on multiprocessor systems.  Before this networking stack
(now called mac80211) could be merged, a locking scheme needed to be
retrofitted onto it.

Once upon a time, Linux kernel code could be developed without thinking
about the concurrency issues presented by multiprocessor systems.  Now,
however, this document is being written on a dual-core laptop.  Even on
single-processor systems, work being done to improve responsiveness will
raise the level of concurrency within the kernel.  The days when kernel
code could be written without thinking about locking are long past.

Any resource (data structures, hardware registers, etc.) which could be
accessed concurrently by more than one thread must be protected by a lock.
New code should be written with this requirement in mind; retrofitting
locking after the fact is a rather more difficult task.  Kernel developers
should take the time to understand the available locking primitives well
enough to pick the right tool for the job.  Code which shows a lack of
attention to concurrency will have a difficult path into the mainline.


Regressions
***********

One final hazard worth mentioning is this: it can be tempting to make a
change (which may bring big improvements) which causes something to break
for existing users.  This kind of change is called a "regression," and
regressions have become most unwelcome in the mainline kernel.  With few
exceptions, changes which cause regressions will be backed out if the
regression cannot be fixed in a timely manner.  Far better to avoid the
regression in the first place.

It is often argued that a regression can be justified if it causes things
to work for more people than it creates problems for.  Why not make a
change if it brings new functionality to ten systems for each one it
breaks?  The best answer to this question was expressed by Linus in July,
2007:

::

	So we don't fix bugs by introducing new problems.  That way lies
	madness, and nobody ever knows if you actually make any real
	progress at all. Is it two steps forwards, one step back, or one
	step forward and two steps back?

(https://lwn.net/Articles/243460/).

An especially unwelcome type of regression is any sort of change to the
user-space ABI.  Once an interface has been exported to user space, it must
be supported indefinitely.  This fact makes the creation of user-space
interfaces particularly challenging: since they cannot be changed in
incompatible ways, they must be done right the first time.  For this
reason, a great deal of thought, clear documentation, and wide review for
user-space interfaces is always required.


Code checking tools
-------------------

For now, at least, the writing of error-free code remains an ideal that few
of us can reach.  What we can hope to do, though, is to catch and fix as
many of those errors as possible before our code goes into the mainline
kernel.  To that end, the kernel developers have put together an impressive
array of tools which can catch a wide variety of obscure problems in an
automated way.  Any problem caught by the computer is a problem which will
not afflict a user later on, so it stands to reason that the automated
tools should be used whenever possible.

The first step is simply to heed the warnings produced by the compiler.
Contemporary versions of gcc can detect (and warn about) a large number of
potential errors.  Quite often, these warnings point to real problems.
Code submitted for review should, as a rule, not produce any compiler
warnings.  When silencing warnings, take care to understand the real cause
and try to avoid "fixes" which make the warning go away without addressing
its cause.

Note that not all compiler warnings are enabled by default.  Build the
kernel with "make KCFLAGS=-W" to get the full set.

The kernel provides several configuration options which turn on debugging
features; most of these are found in the "kernel hacking" submenu.  Several
of these options should be turned on for any kernel used for development or
testing purposes.  In particular, you should turn on:

 - FRAME_WARN to get warnings for stack frames larger than a given amount.
   The output generated can be verbose, but one need not worry about
   warnings from other parts of the kernel.

 - DEBUG_OBJECTS will add code to track the lifetime of various objects
   created by the kernel and warn when things are done out of order.  If
   you are adding a subsystem which creates (and exports) complex objects
   of its own, consider adding support for the object debugging
   infrastructure.

 - DEBUG_SLAB can find a variety of memory allocation and use errors; it
   should be used on most development kernels.

 - DEBUG_SPINLOCK, DEBUG_ATOMIC_SLEEP, and DEBUG_MUTEXES will find a
   number of common locking errors.

There are quite a few other debugging options, some of which will be
discussed below.  Some of them have a significant performance impact and
should not be used all of the time.  But some time spent learning the
available options will likely be paid back many times over in short order.

One of the heavier debugging tools is the locking checker, or "lockdep."
This tool will track the acquisition and release of every lock (spinlock or
mutex) in the system, the order in which locks are acquired relative to
each other, the current interrupt environment, and more.  It can then
ensure that locks are always acquired in the same order, that the same
interrupt assumptions apply in all situations, and so on.  In other words,
lockdep can find a number of scenarios in which the system could, on rare
occasion, deadlock.  This kind of problem can be painful (for both
developers and users) in a deployed system; lockdep allows them to be found
in an automated manner ahead of time.  Code with any sort of non-trivial
locking should be run with lockdep enabled before being submitted for
inclusion.

As a diligent kernel programmer, you will, beyond doubt, check the return
status of any operation (such as a memory allocation) which can fail.  The
fact of the matter, though, is that the resulting failure recovery paths
are, probably, completely untested.  Untested code tends to be broken code;
you could be much more confident of your code if all those error-handling
paths had been exercised a few times.

The kernel provides a fault injection framework which can do exactly that,
especially where memory allocations are involved.  With fault injection
enabled, a configurable percentage of memory allocations will be made to
fail; these failures can be restricted to a specific range of code.
Running with fault injection enabled allows the programmer to see how the
code responds when things go badly.  See
Documentation/fault-injection/fault-injection.rst for more information on
how to use this facility.

Other kinds of errors can be found with the "sparse" static analysis tool.
With sparse, the programmer can be warned about confusion between
user-space and kernel-space addresses, mixture of big-endian and
small-endian quantities, the passing of integer values where a set of bit
flags is expected, and so on.  Sparse must be installed separately (it can
be found at https://sparse.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page if your
distributor does not package it); it can then be run on the code by adding
"C=1" to your make command.

The "Coccinelle" tool (http://coccinelle.lip6.fr/) is able to find a wide
variety of potential coding problems; it can also propose fixes for those
problems.  Quite a few "semantic patches" for the kernel have been packaged
under the scripts/coccinelle directory; running "make coccicheck" will run
through those semantic patches and report on any problems found.  See
:ref:`Documentation/dev-tools/coccinelle.rst <devtools_coccinelle>`
for more information.

Other kinds of portability errors are best found by compiling your code for
other architectures.  If you do not happen to have an S/390 system or a
Blackfin development board handy, you can still perform the compilation
step.  A large set of cross compilers for x86 systems can be found at

	https://www.kernel.org/pub/tools/crosstool/

Some time spent installing and using these compilers will help avoid
embarrassment later.


Documentation
-------------

Documentation has often been more the exception than the rule with kernel
development.  Even so, adequate documentation will help to ease the merging
of new code into the kernel, make life easier for other developers, and
will be helpful for your users.  In many cases, the addition of
documentation has become essentially mandatory.

The first piece of documentation for any patch is its associated
changelog.  Log entries should describe the problem being solved, the form
of the solution, the people who worked on the patch, any relevant
effects on performance, and anything else that might be needed to
understand the patch.  Be sure that the changelog says *why* the patch is
worth applying; a surprising number of developers fail to provide that
information.

Any code which adds a new user-space interface - including new sysfs or
/proc files - should include documentation of that interface which enables
user-space developers to know what they are working with.  See
Documentation/ABI/README for a description of how this documentation should
be formatted and what information needs to be provided.

The file :ref:`Documentation/admin-guide/kernel-parameters.rst
<kernelparameters>` describes all of the kernel's boot-time parameters.
Any patch which adds new parameters should add the appropriate entries to
this file.

Any new configuration options must be accompanied by help text which
clearly explains the options and when the user might want to select them.

Internal API information for many subsystems is documented by way of
specially-formatted comments; these comments can be extracted and formatted
in a number of ways by the "kernel-doc" script.  If you are working within
a subsystem which has kerneldoc comments, you should maintain them and add
them, as appropriate, for externally-available functions.  Even in areas
which have not been so documented, there is no harm in adding kerneldoc
comments for the future; indeed, this can be a useful activity for
beginning kernel developers.  The format of these comments, along with some
information on how to create kerneldoc templates can be found at
:ref:`Documentation/doc-guide/ <doc_guide>`.

Anybody who reads through a significant amount of existing kernel code will
note that, often, comments are most notable by their absence.  Once again,
the expectations for new code are higher than they were in the past;
merging uncommented code will be harder.  That said, there is little desire
for verbosely-commented code.  The code should, itself, be readable, with
comments explaining the more subtle aspects.

Certain things should always be commented.  Uses of memory barriers should
be accompanied by a line explaining why the barrier is necessary.  The
locking rules for data structures generally need to be explained somewhere.
Major data structures need comprehensive documentation in general.
Non-obvious dependencies between separate bits of code should be pointed
out.  Anything which might tempt a code janitor to make an incorrect
"cleanup" needs a comment saying why it is done the way it is.  And so on.


Internal API changes
--------------------

The binary interface provided by the kernel to user space cannot be broken
except under the most severe circumstances.  The kernel's internal
programming interfaces, instead, are highly fluid and can be changed when
the need arises.  If you find yourself having to work around a kernel API,
or simply not using a specific functionality because it does not meet your
needs, that may be a sign that the API needs to change.  As a kernel
developer, you are empowered to make such changes.

There are, of course, some catches.  API changes can be made, but they need
to be well justified.  So any patch making an internal API change should be
accompanied by a description of what the change is and why it is
necessary.  This kind of change should also be broken out into a separate
patch, rather than buried within a larger patch.

The other catch is that a developer who changes an internal API is
generally charged with the task of fixing any code within the kernel tree
which is broken by the change.  For a widely-used function, this duty can
lead to literally hundreds or thousands of changes - many of which are
likely to conflict with work being done by other developers.  Needless to
say, this can be a large job, so it is best to be sure that the
justification is solid.  Note that the Coccinelle tool can help with
wide-ranging API changes.

When making an incompatible API change, one should, whenever possible,
ensure that code which has not been updated is caught by the compiler.
This will help you to be sure that you have found all in-tree uses of that
interface.  It will also alert developers of out-of-tree code that there is
a change that they need to respond to.  Supporting out-of-tree code is not
something that kernel developers need to be worried about, but we also do
not have to make life harder for out-of-tree developers than it needs to
be.
.. _development_posting:

Posting patches
===============

Sooner or later, the time comes when your work is ready to be presented to
the community for review and, eventually, inclusion into the mainline
kernel.  Unsurprisingly, the kernel development community has evolved a set
of conventions and procedures which are used in the posting of patches;
following them will make life much easier for everybody involved.  This
document will attempt to cover these expectations in reasonable detail;
more information can also be found in the files
:ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`
and :ref:`Documentation/process/submit-checklist.rst <submitchecklist>`.


When to post
------------

There is a constant temptation to avoid posting patches before they are
completely "ready."  For simple patches, that is not a problem.  If the
work being done is complex, though, there is a lot to be gained by getting
feedback from the community before the work is complete.  So you should
consider posting in-progress work, or even making a git tree available so
that interested developers can catch up with your work at any time.

When posting code which is not yet considered ready for inclusion, it is a
good idea to say so in the posting itself.  Also mention any major work
which remains to be done and any known problems.  Fewer people will look at
patches which are known to be half-baked, but those who do will come in
with the idea that they can help you drive the work in the right direction.


Before creating patches
-----------------------

There are a number of things which should be done before you consider
sending patches to the development community.  These include:

 - Test the code to the extent that you can.  Make use of the kernel's
   debugging tools, ensure that the kernel will build with all reasonable
   combinations of configuration options, use cross-compilers to build for
   different architectures, etc.

 - Make sure your code is compliant with the kernel coding style
   guidelines.

 - Does your change have performance implications?  If so, you should run
   benchmarks showing what the impact (or benefit) of your change is; a
   summary of the results should be included with the patch.

 - Be sure that you have the right to post the code.  If this work was done
   for an employer, the employer likely has a right to the work and must be
   agreeable with its release under the GPL.

As a general rule, putting in some extra thought before posting code almost
always pays back the effort in short order.


Patch preparation
-----------------

The preparation of patches for posting can be a surprising amount of work,
but, once again, attempting to save time here is not generally advisable
even in the short term.

Patches must be prepared against a specific version of the kernel.  As a
general rule, a patch should be based on the current mainline as found in
Linus's git tree.  When basing on mainline, start with a well-known release
point - a stable or -rc release - rather than branching off the mainline at
an arbitrary spot.

It may become necessary to make versions against -mm, linux-next, or a
subsystem tree, though, to facilitate wider testing and review.  Depending
on the area of your patch and what is going on elsewhere, basing a patch
against these other trees can require a significant amount of work
resolving conflicts and dealing with API changes.

Only the most simple changes should be formatted as a single patch;
everything else should be made as a logical series of changes.  Splitting
up patches is a bit of an art; some developers spend a long time figuring
out how to do it in the way that the community expects.  There are a few
rules of thumb, however, which can help considerably:

 - The patch series you post will almost certainly not be the series of
   changes found in your working revision control system.  Instead, the
   changes you have made need to be considered in their final form, then
   split apart in ways which make sense.  The developers are interested in
   discrete, self-contained changes, not the path you took to get to those
   changes.

 - Each logically independent change should be formatted as a separate
   patch.  These changes can be small ("add a field to this structure") or
   large (adding a significant new driver, for example), but they should be
   conceptually small and amenable to a one-line description.  Each patch
   should make a specific change which can be reviewed on its own and
   verified to do what it says it does.

 - As a way of restating the guideline above: do not mix different types of
   changes in the same patch.  If a single patch fixes a critical security
   bug, rearranges a few structures, and reformats the code, there is a
   good chance that it will be passed over and the important fix will be
   lost.

 - Each patch should yield a kernel which builds and runs properly; if your
   patch series is interrupted in the middle, the result should still be a
   working kernel.  Partial application of a patch series is a common
   scenario when the "git bisect" tool is used to find regressions; if the
   result is a broken kernel, you will make life harder for developers and
   users who are engaging in the noble work of tracking down problems.

 - Do not overdo it, though.  One developer once posted a set of edits
   to a single file as 500 separate patches - an act which did not make him
   the most popular person on the kernel mailing list.  A single patch can
   be reasonably large as long as it still contains a single *logical*
   change.

 - It can be tempting to add a whole new infrastructure with a series of
   patches, but to leave that infrastructure unused until the final patch
   in the series enables the whole thing.  This temptation should be
   avoided if possible; if that series adds regressions, bisection will
   finger the last patch as the one which caused the problem, even though
   the real bug is elsewhere.  Whenever possible, a patch which adds new
   code should make that code active immediately.

Working to create the perfect patch series can be a frustrating process
which takes quite a bit of time and thought after the "real work" has been
done.  When done properly, though, it is time well spent.


Patch formatting and changelogs
-------------------------------

So now you have a perfect series of patches for posting, but the work is
not done quite yet.  Each patch needs to be formatted into a message which
quickly and clearly communicates its purpose to the rest of the world.  To
that end, each patch will be composed of the following:

 - An optional "From" line naming the author of the patch.  This line is
   only necessary if you are passing on somebody else's patch via email,
   but it never hurts to add it when in doubt.

 - A one-line description of what the patch does.  This message should be
   enough for a reader who sees it with no other context to figure out the
   scope of the patch; it is the line that will show up in the "short form"
   changelogs.  This message is usually formatted with the relevant
   subsystem name first, followed by the purpose of the patch.  For
   example:

   ::

	gpio: fix build on CONFIG_GPIO_SYSFS=n

 - A blank line followed by a detailed description of the contents of the
   patch.  This description can be as long as is required; it should say
   what the patch does and why it should be applied to the kernel.

 - One or more tag lines, with, at a minimum, one Signed-off-by: line from
   the author of the patch.  Tags will be described in more detail below.

The items above, together, form the changelog for the patch.  Writing good
changelogs is a crucial but often-neglected art; it's worth spending
another moment discussing this issue.  When writing a changelog, you should
bear in mind that a number of different people will be reading your words.
These include subsystem maintainers and reviewers who need to decide
whether the patch should be included, distributors and other maintainers
trying to decide whether a patch should be backported to other kernels, bug
hunters wondering whether the patch is responsible for a problem they are
chasing, users who want to know how the kernel has changed, and more.  A
good changelog conveys the needed information to all of these people in the
most direct and concise way possible.

To that end, the summary line should describe the effects of and motivation
for the change as well as possible given the one-line constraint.  The
detailed description can then amplify on those topics and provide any
needed additional information.  If the patch fixes a bug, cite the commit
which introduced the bug if possible (and please provide both the commit ID
and the title when citing commits).  If a problem is associated with
specific log or compiler output, include that output to help others
searching for a solution to the same problem.  If the change is meant to
support other changes coming in later patch, say so.  If internal APIs are
changed, detail those changes and how other developers should respond.  In
general, the more you can put yourself into the shoes of everybody who will
be reading your changelog, the better that changelog (and the kernel as a
whole) will be.

Needless to say, the changelog should be the text used when committing the
change to a revision control system.  It will be followed by:

 - The patch itself, in the unified ("-u") patch format.  Using the "-p"
   option to diff will associate function names with changes, making the
   resulting patch easier for others to read.

You should avoid including changes to irrelevant files (those generated by
the build process, for example, or editor backup files) in the patch.  The
file "dontdiff" in the Documentation directory can help in this regard;
pass it to diff with the "-X" option.

The tags already briefly mentioned above are used to provide insights how
the patch came into being. They are described in detail in the
:ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`
document; what follows here is a brief summary.

One tag is used to refer to earlier commits which introduced problems fixed by
the patch::

	Fixes: 1f2e3d4c5b6a ("The first line of the commit specified by the first 12 characters of its SHA-1 ID")

Another tag is used for linking web pages with additional backgrounds or
details, for example an earlier discussion which leads to the patch or a
document with a specification implemented by the patch::

	Link: https://example.com/somewhere.html  optional-other-stuff

Many maintainers when applying a patch also add this tag to link to the
latest public review posting of the patch; often this is automatically done
by tools like b4 or a git hook like the one described in
'Documentation/maintainer/configure-git.rst'.

If the URL points to a public bug report being fixed by the patch, use the
"Closes:" tag instead::

	Closes: https://example.com/issues/1234  optional-other-stuff

Some bug trackers have the ability to close issues automatically when a
commit with such a tag is applied. Some bots monitoring mailing lists can
also track such tags and take certain actions. Private bug trackers and
invalid URLs are forbidden.

Another kind of tag is used to document who was involved in the development of
the patch. Each of these uses this format::

	tag: Full Name <email address>  optional-other-stuff

The tags in common use are:

 - Signed-off-by: this is a developer's certification that he or she has
   the right to submit the patch for inclusion into the kernel.  It is an
   agreement to the Developer's Certificate of Origin, the full text of
   which can be found in :ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`
   Code without a proper signoff cannot be merged into the mainline.

 - Co-developed-by: states that the patch was co-created by several developers;
   it is a used to give attribution to co-authors (in addition to the author
   attributed by the From: tag) when multiple people work on a single patch.
   Every Co-developed-by: must be immediately followed by a Signed-off-by: of
   the associated co-author.  Details and examples can be found in
   :ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`.

 - Acked-by: indicates an agreement by another developer (often a
   maintainer of the relevant code) that the patch is appropriate for
   inclusion into the kernel.

 - Tested-by: states that the named person has tested the patch and found
   it to work.

 - Reviewed-by: the named developer has reviewed the patch for correctness;
   see the reviewer's statement in :ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`
   for more detail.

 - Reported-by: names a user who reported a problem which is fixed by this
   patch; this tag is used to give credit to the (often underappreciated)
   people who test our code and let us know when things do not work
   correctly. Note, this tag should be followed by a Closes: tag pointing to
   the report, unless the report is not available on the web. The Link: tag
   can be used instead of Closes: if the patch fixes a part of the issue(s)
   being reported.

 - Cc: the named person received a copy of the patch and had the
   opportunity to comment on it.

Be careful in the addition of tags to your patches, as only Cc: is appropriate
for addition without the explicit permission of the person named; using
Reported-by: is fine most of the time as well, but ask for permission if
the bug was reported in private.


Sending the patch
-----------------

Before you mail your patches, there are a couple of other things you should
take care of:

 - Are you sure that your mailer will not corrupt the patches?  Patches
   which have had gratuitous white-space changes or line wrapping performed
   by the mail client will not apply at the other end, and often will not
   be examined in any detail.  If there is any doubt at all, mail the patch
   to yourself and convince yourself that it shows up intact.

   :ref:`Documentation/process/email-clients.rst <email_clients>` has some
   helpful hints on making specific mail clients work for sending patches.

 - Are you sure your patch is free of silly mistakes?  You should always
   run patches through scripts/checkpatch.pl and address the complaints it
   comes up with.  Please bear in mind that checkpatch.pl, while being the
   embodiment of a fair amount of thought about what kernel patches should
   look like, is not smarter than you.  If fixing a checkpatch.pl complaint
   would make the code worse, don't do it.

Patches should always be sent as plain text.  Please do not send them as
attachments; that makes it much harder for reviewers to quote sections of
the patch in their replies.  Instead, just put the patch directly into your
message.

When mailing patches, it is important to send copies to anybody who might
be interested in it.  Unlike some other projects, the kernel encourages
people to err on the side of sending too many copies; don't assume that the
relevant people will see your posting on the mailing lists.  In particular,
copies should go to:

 - The maintainer(s) of the affected subsystem(s).  As described earlier,
   the MAINTAINERS file is the first place to look for these people.

 - Other developers who have been working in the same area - especially
   those who might be working there now.  Using git to see who else has
   modified the files you are working on can be helpful.

 - If you are responding to a bug report or a feature request, copy the
   original poster as well.

 - Send a copy to the relevant mailing list, or, if nothing else applies,
   the linux-kernel list.

 - If you are fixing a bug, think about whether the fix should go into the
   next stable update.  If so, stable@vger.kernel.org should get a copy of
   the patch.  Also add a "Cc: stable@vger.kernel.org" to the tags within
   the patch itself; that will cause the stable team to get a notification
   when your fix goes into the mainline.

When selecting recipients for a patch, it is good to have an idea of who
you think will eventually accept the patch and get it merged.  While it
is possible to send patches directly to Linus Torvalds and have him merge
them, things are not normally done that way.  Linus is busy, and there are
subsystem maintainers who watch over specific parts of the kernel.  Usually
you will be wanting that maintainer to merge your patches.  If there is no
obvious maintainer, Andrew Morton is often the patch target of last resort.

Patches need good subject lines.  The canonical format for a patch line is
something like:

::

	[PATCH nn/mm] subsys: one-line description of the patch

where "nn" is the ordinal number of the patch, "mm" is the total number of
patches in the series, and "subsys" is the name of the affected subsystem.
Clearly, nn/mm can be omitted for a single, standalone patch.

If you have a significant series of patches, it is customary to send an
introductory description as part zero.  This convention is not universally
followed though; if you use it, remember that information in the
introduction does not make it into the kernel changelogs.  So please ensure
that the patches, themselves, have complete changelog information.

In general, the second and following parts of a multi-part patch should be
sent as a reply to the first part so that they all thread together at the
receiving end.  Tools like git and quilt have commands to mail out a set of
patches with the proper threading.  If you have a long series, though, and
are using git, please stay away from the --chain-reply-to option to avoid
creating exceptionally deep nesting.
.. _development_followthrough:

Followthrough
=============

At this point, you have followed the guidelines given so far and, with the
addition of your own engineering skills, have posted a perfect series of
patches.  One of the biggest mistakes that even experienced kernel
developers can make is to conclude that their work is now done.  In truth,
posting patches indicates a transition into the next stage of the process,
with, possibly, quite a bit of work yet to be done.

It is a rare patch which is so good at its first posting that there is no
room for improvement.  The kernel development process recognizes this fact,
and, as a result, is heavily oriented toward the improvement of posted
code.  You, as the author of that code, will be expected to work with the
kernel community to ensure that your code is up to the kernel's quality
standards.  A failure to participate in this process is quite likely to
prevent the inclusion of your patches into the mainline.


Working with reviewers
----------------------

A patch of any significance will result in a number of comments from other
developers as they review the code.  Working with reviewers can be, for
many developers, the most intimidating part of the kernel development
process.  Life can be made much easier, though, if you keep a few things in
mind:

 - If you have explained your patch well, reviewers will understand its
   value and why you went to the trouble of writing it.  But that value
   will not keep them from asking a fundamental question: what will it be
   like to maintain a kernel with this code in it five or ten years later?
   Many of the changes you may be asked to make - from coding style tweaks
   to substantial rewrites - come from the understanding that Linux will
   still be around and under development a decade from now.

 - Code review is hard work, and it is a relatively thankless occupation;
   people remember who wrote kernel code, but there is little lasting fame
   for those who reviewed it.  So reviewers can get grumpy, especially when
   they see the same mistakes being made over and over again.  If you get a
   review which seems angry, insulting, or outright offensive, resist the
   impulse to respond in kind.  Code review is about the code, not about
   the people, and code reviewers are not attacking you personally.

 - Similarly, code reviewers are not trying to promote their employers'
   agendas at the expense of your own.  Kernel developers often expect to
   be working on the kernel years from now, but they understand that their
   employer could change.  They truly are, almost without exception,
   working toward the creation of the best kernel they can; they are not
   trying to create discomfort for their employers' competitors.

 - Be prepared for seemingly silly requests for coding style changes
   and requests to factor out some of your code to shared parts of
   the kernel. One job the maintainers do is to keep things looking
   the same. Sometimes this means that the clever hack in your driver
   to get around a problem actually needs to become a generalized
   kernel feature ready for next time.

What all of this comes down to is that, when reviewers send you comments,
you need to pay attention to the technical observations that they are
making.  Do not let their form of expression or your own pride keep that
from happening.  When you get review comments on a patch, take the time to
understand what the reviewer is trying to say.  If possible, fix the things
that the reviewer is asking you to fix.  And respond back to the reviewer:
thank them, and describe how you will answer their questions.

Note that you do not have to agree with every change suggested by
reviewers.  If you believe that the reviewer has misunderstood your code,
explain what is really going on.  If you have a technical objection to a
suggested change, describe it and justify your solution to the problem.  If
your explanations make sense, the reviewer will accept them.  Should your
explanation not prove persuasive, though, especially if others start to
agree with the reviewer, take some time to think things over again.  It can
be easy to become blinded by your own solution to a problem to the point
that you don't realize that something is fundamentally wrong or, perhaps,
you're not even solving the right problem.

Andrew Morton has suggested that every review comment which does not result
in a code change should result in an additional code comment instead; that
can help future reviewers avoid the questions which came up the first time
around.

One fatal mistake is to ignore review comments in the hope that they will
go away.  They will not go away.  If you repost code without having
responded to the comments you got the time before, you're likely to find
that your patches go nowhere.

Speaking of reposting code: please bear in mind that reviewers are not
going to remember all the details of the code you posted the last time
around.  So it is always a good idea to remind reviewers of previously
raised issues and how you dealt with them; the patch changelog is a good
place for this kind of information.  Reviewers should not have to search
through list archives to familiarize themselves with what was said last
time; if you help them get a running start, they will be in a better mood
when they revisit your code.

What if you've tried to do everything right and things still aren't going
anywhere?  Most technical disagreements can be resolved through discussion,
but there are times when somebody simply has to make a decision.  If you
honestly believe that this decision is going against you wrongly, you can
always try appealing to a higher power.  As of this writing, that higher
power tends to be Andrew Morton.  Andrew has a great deal of respect in the
kernel development community; he can often unjam a situation which seems to
be hopelessly blocked.  Appealing to Andrew should not be done lightly,
though, and not before all other alternatives have been explored.  And bear
in mind, of course, that he may not agree with you either.


What happens next
-----------------

If a patch is considered to be a good thing to add to the kernel, and once
most of the review issues have been resolved, the next step is usually
entry into a subsystem maintainer's tree.  How that works varies from one
subsystem to the next; each maintainer has his or her own way of doing
things.  In particular, there may be more than one tree - one, perhaps,
dedicated to patches planned for the next merge window, and another for
longer-term work.

For patches applying to areas for which there is no obvious subsystem tree
(memory management patches, for example), the default tree often ends up
being -mm.  Patches which affect multiple subsystems can also end up going
through the -mm tree.

Inclusion into a subsystem tree can bring a higher level of visibility to a
patch.  Now other developers working with that tree will get the patch by
default.  Subsystem trees typically feed linux-next as well, making their
contents visible to the development community as a whole.  At this point,
there's a good chance that you will get more comments from a new set of
reviewers; these comments need to be answered as in the previous round.

What may also happen at this point, depending on the nature of your patch,
is that conflicts with work being done by others turn up.  In the worst
case, heavy patch conflicts can result in some work being put on the back
burner so that the remaining patches can be worked into shape and merged.
Other times, conflict resolution will involve working with the other
developers and, possibly, moving some patches between trees to ensure that
everything applies cleanly.  This work can be a pain, but count your
blessings: before the advent of the linux-next tree, these conflicts often
only turned up during the merge window and had to be addressed in a hurry.
Now they can be resolved at leisure, before the merge window opens.

Some day, if all goes well, you'll log on and see that your patch has been
merged into the mainline kernel.  Congratulations!  Once the celebration is
complete (and you have added yourself to the MAINTAINERS file), though, it
is worth remembering an important little fact: the job still is not done.
Merging into the mainline brings its own challenges.

To begin with, the visibility of your patch has increased yet again.  There
may be a new round of comments from developers who had not been aware of
the patch before.  It may be tempting to ignore them, since there is no
longer any question of your code being merged.  Resist that temptation,
though; you still need to be responsive to developers who have questions or
suggestions.

More importantly, though: inclusion into the mainline puts your code into
the hands of a much larger group of testers.  Even if you have contributed
a driver for hardware which is not yet available, you will be surprised by
how many people will build your code into their kernels.  And, of course,
where there are testers, there will be bug reports.

The worst sort of bug reports are regressions.  If your patch causes a
regression, you'll find an uncomfortable number of eyes upon you;
regressions need to be fixed as soon as possible.  If you are unwilling or
unable to fix the regression (and nobody else does it for you), your patch
will almost certainly be removed during the stabilization period.  Beyond
negating all of the work you have done to get your patch into the mainline,
having a patch pulled as the result of a failure to fix a regression could
well make it harder for you to get work merged in the future.

After any regressions have been dealt with, there may be other, ordinary
bugs to deal with.  The stabilization period is your best opportunity to
fix these bugs and ensure that your code's debut in a mainline kernel
release is as solid as possible.  So, please, answer bug reports, and fix
the problems if at all possible.  That's what the stabilization period is
for; you can start creating cool new patches once any problems with the old
ones have been taken care of.

And don't forget that there are other milestones which may also create bug
reports: the next mainline stable release, when prominent distributors pick
up a version of the kernel containing your patch, etc.  Continuing to
respond to these reports is a matter of basic pride in your work.  If that
is insufficient motivation, though, it's also worth considering that the
development community remembers developers who lose interest in their code
after it's merged.  The next time you post a patch, they will be evaluating
it with the assumption that you will not be around to maintain it
afterward.


Other things that can happen
-----------------------------

One day, you may open your mail client and see that somebody has mailed you
a patch to your code.  That is one of the advantages of having your code
out there in the open, after all.  If you agree with the patch, you can
either forward it on to the subsystem maintainer (be sure to include a
proper From: line so that the attribution is correct, and add a signoff of
your own), or send an Acked-by: response back and let the original poster
send it upward.

If you disagree with the patch, send a polite response explaining why.  If
possible, tell the author what changes need to be made to make the patch
acceptable to you.  There is a certain resistance to merging patches which
are opposed by the author and maintainer of the code, but it only goes so
far.  If you are seen as needlessly blocking good work, those patches will
eventually flow around you and get into the mainline anyway.  In the Linux
kernel, nobody has absolute veto power over any code.  Except maybe Linus.

On very rare occasion, you may see something completely different: another
developer posts a different solution to your problem.  At that point,
chances are that one of the two patches will not be merged, and "mine was
here first" is not considered to be a compelling technical argument.  If
somebody else's patch displaces yours and gets into the mainline, there is
really only one way to respond: be pleased that your problem got solved and
get on with your work.  Having one's work shoved aside in this manner can
be hurtful and discouraging, but the community will remember your reaction
long after they have forgotten whose patch actually got merged.
.. _development_advancedtopics:

Advanced topics
===============

At this point, hopefully, you have a handle on how the development process
works.  There is still more to learn, however!  This section will cover a
number of topics which can be helpful for developers wanting to become a
regular part of the Linux kernel development process.

Managing patches with git
-------------------------

The use of distributed version control for the kernel began in early 2002,
when Linus first started playing with the proprietary BitKeeper
application.  While BitKeeper was controversial, the approach to software
version management it embodied most certainly was not.  Distributed version
control enabled an immediate acceleration of the kernel development
project.  In current times, there are several free alternatives to
BitKeeper.  For better or for worse, the kernel project has settled on git
as its tool of choice.

Managing patches with git can make life much easier for the developer,
especially as the volume of those patches grows.  Git also has its rough
edges and poses certain hazards; it is a young and powerful tool which is
still being civilized by its developers.  This document will not attempt to
teach the reader how to use git; that would be sufficient material for a
long document in its own right.  Instead, the focus here will be on how git
fits into the kernel development process in particular.  Developers who
wish to come up to speed with git will find more information at:

	https://git-scm.com/

	https://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/user-manual.html

and on various tutorials found on the web.

The first order of business is to read the above sites and get a solid
understanding of how git works before trying to use it to make patches
available to others.  A git-using developer should be able to obtain a copy
of the mainline repository, explore the revision history, commit changes to
the tree, use branches, etc.  An understanding of git's tools for the
rewriting of history (such as rebase) is also useful.  Git comes with its
own terminology and concepts; a new user of git should know about refs,
remote branches, the index, fast-forward merges, pushes and pulls, detached
heads, etc.  It can all be a little intimidating at the outset, but the
concepts are not that hard to grasp with a bit of study.

Using git to generate patches for submission by email can be a good
exercise while coming up to speed.

When you are ready to start putting up git trees for others to look at, you
will, of course, need a server that can be pulled from.  Setting up such a
server with git-daemon is relatively straightforward if you have a system
which is accessible to the Internet.  Otherwise, free, public hosting sites
(Github, for example) are starting to appear on the net.  Established
developers can get an account on kernel.org, but those are not easy to come
by; see https://kernel.org/faq/ for more information.

The normal git workflow involves the use of a lot of branches.  Each line
of development can be separated into a separate "topic branch" and
maintained independently.  Branches in git are cheap, there is no reason to
not make free use of them.  And, in any case, you should not do your
development in any branch which you intend to ask others to pull from.
Publicly-available branches should be created with care; merge in patches
from development branches when they are in complete form and ready to go -
not before.

Git provides some powerful tools which can allow you to rewrite your
development history.  An inconvenient patch (one which breaks bisection,
say, or which has some other sort of obvious bug) can be fixed in place or
made to disappear from the history entirely.  A patch series can be
rewritten as if it had been written on top of today's mainline, even though
you have been working on it for months.  Changes can be transparently
shifted from one branch to another.  And so on.  Judicious use of git's
ability to revise history can help in the creation of clean patch sets with
fewer problems.

Excessive use of this capability can lead to other problems, though, beyond
a simple obsession for the creation of the perfect project history.
Rewriting history will rewrite the changes contained in that history,
turning a tested (hopefully) kernel tree into an untested one.  But, beyond
that, developers cannot easily collaborate if they do not have a shared
view of the project history; if you rewrite history which other developers
have pulled into their repositories, you will make life much more difficult
for those developers.  So a simple rule of thumb applies here: history
which has been exported to others should generally be seen as immutable
thereafter.

So, once you push a set of changes to your publicly-available server, those
changes should not be rewritten.  Git will attempt to enforce this rule if
you try to push changes which do not result in a fast-forward merge
(i.e. changes which do not share the same history).  It is possible to
override this check, and there may be times when it is necessary to rewrite
an exported tree.  Moving changesets between trees to avoid conflicts in
linux-next is one example.  But such actions should be rare.  This is one
of the reasons why development should be done in private branches (which
can be rewritten if necessary) and only moved into public branches when
it's in a reasonably advanced state.

As the mainline (or other tree upon which a set of changes is based)
advances, it is tempting to merge with that tree to stay on the leading
edge.  For a private branch, rebasing can be an easy way to keep up with
another tree, but rebasing is not an option once a tree is exported to the
world.  Once that happens, a full merge must be done.  Merging occasionally
makes good sense, but overly frequent merges can clutter the history
needlessly.  Suggested technique in this case is to merge infrequently, and
generally only at specific release points (such as a mainline -rc
release).  If you are nervous about specific changes, you can always
perform test merges in a private branch.  The git "rerere" tool can be
useful in such situations; it remembers how merge conflicts were resolved
so that you don't have to do the same work twice.

One of the biggest recurring complaints about tools like git is this: the
mass movement of patches from one repository to another makes it easy to
slip in ill-advised changes which go into the mainline below the review
radar.  Kernel developers tend to get unhappy when they see that kind of
thing happening; putting up a git tree with unreviewed or off-topic patches
can affect your ability to get trees pulled in the future.  Quoting Linus:

::

	You can send me patches, but for me to pull a git patch from you, I
	need to know that you know what you're doing, and I need to be able
	to trust things *without* then having to go and check every
	individual change by hand.

(https://lwn.net/Articles/224135/).

To avoid this kind of situation, ensure that all patches within a given
branch stick closely to the associated topic; a "driver fixes" branch
should not be making changes to the core memory management code.  And, most
importantly, do not use a git tree to bypass the review process.  Post an
occasional summary of the tree to the relevant list, and, when the time is
right, request that the tree be included in linux-next.

If and when others start to send patches for inclusion into your tree,
don't forget to review them.  Also ensure that you maintain the correct
authorship information; the git "am" tool does its best in this regard, but
you may have to add a "From:" line to the patch if it has been relayed to
you via a third party.

When requesting a pull, be sure to give all the relevant information: where
your tree is, what branch to pull, and what changes will result from the
pull.  The git request-pull command can be helpful in this regard; it will
format the request as other developers expect, and will also check to be
sure that you have remembered to push those changes to the public server.

.. _development_advancedtopics_reviews:

Reviewing patches
-----------------

Some readers will certainly object to putting this section with "advanced
topics" on the grounds that even beginning kernel developers should be
reviewing patches.  It is certainly true that there is no better way to
learn how to program in the kernel environment than by looking at code
posted by others.  In addition, reviewers are forever in short supply; by
looking at code you can make a significant contribution to the process as a
whole.

Reviewing code can be an intimidating prospect, especially for a new kernel
developer who may well feel nervous about questioning code - in public -
which has been posted by those with more experience.  Even code written by
the most experienced developers can be improved, though.  Perhaps the best
piece of advice for reviewers (all reviewers) is this: phrase review
comments as questions rather than criticisms.  Asking "how does the lock
get released in this path?" will always work better than stating "the
locking here is wrong."

Another technique that is useful in case of a disagreement is to ask for others
to chime in. If a discussion reaches a stalemate after a few exchanges,
then call for opinions of other reviewers or maintainers. Often those in
agreement with a reviewer remain silent unless called upon.
The opinion of multiple people carries exponentially more weight.

Different developers will review code from different points of view.  Some
are mostly concerned with coding style and whether code lines have trailing
white space.  Others will focus primarily on whether the change implemented
by the patch as a whole is a good thing for the kernel or not.  Yet others
will check for problematic locking, excessive stack usage, possible
security issues, duplication of code found elsewhere, adequate
documentation, adverse effects on performance, user-space ABI changes, etc.
All types of review, if they lead to better code going into the kernel, are
welcome and worthwhile.

There is no strict requirement to use specific tags like ``Reviewed-by``.
In fact reviews in plain English are more informative and encouraged
even when a tag is provided, e.g. "I looked at aspects A, B and C of this
submission and it looks good to me."
Some form of a review message or reply is obviously necessary otherwise
maintainers will not know that the reviewer has looked at the patch at all!

Last but not least patch review may become a negative process, focused
on pointing out problems. Please throw in a compliment once in a while,
particularly for newbies!
.. _development_conclusion:

For more information
====================

There are numerous sources of information on Linux kernel development and
related topics.  First among those will always be the Documentation
directory found in the kernel source distribution.  Start with the
top-level :ref:`process/howto.rst <process_howto>`; also read
:ref:`process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`. Many internal
kernel APIs are documented using the kerneldoc mechanism; "make htmldocs"
or "make pdfdocs" can be used to generate those documents in HTML or PDF
format (though the version of TeX shipped by some distributions runs into
internal limits and fails to process the documents properly).

Various web sites discuss kernel development at all levels of detail.  Your
author would like to humbly suggest https://lwn.net/ as a source;
information on many specific kernel topics can be found via the LWN kernel
index at:

	https://lwn.net/Kernel/Index/

Beyond that, a valuable resource for kernel developers is:

	https://kernelnewbies.org/

And, of course, one should not forget https://kernel.org/, the definitive
location for kernel release information.

There are a number of books on kernel development:

	Linux Device Drivers, 3rd Edition (Jonathan Corbet, Alessandro
	Rubini, and Greg Kroah-Hartman).  Online at
	https://lwn.net/Kernel/LDD3/.

	Linux Kernel Development (Robert Love).

	Understanding the Linux Kernel (Daniel Bovet and Marco Cesati).

All of these books suffer from a common fault, though: they tend to be
somewhat obsolete by the time they hit the shelves, and they have been on
the shelves for a while now.  Still, there is quite a bit of good
information to be found there.

Documentation for git can be found at:

	https://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/

	https://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/user-manual.html


Conclusion
==========

Congratulations to anybody who has made it through this long-winded
document.  Hopefully it has provided a helpful understanding of how the
Linux kernel is developed and how you can participate in that process.

In the end, it's the participation that matters.  Any open source software
project is no more than the sum of what its contributors put into it.  The
Linux kernel has progressed as quickly and as well as it has because it has
been helped by an impressively large group of developers, all of whom are
working to make it better.  The kernel is a premier example of what can be
done when thousands of people work together toward a common goal.

The kernel can always benefit from a larger developer base, though.  There
is always more work to do.  But, just as importantly, most other
participants in the Linux ecosystem can benefit through contributing to the
kernel.  Getting code into the mainline is the key to higher code quality,
lower maintenance and distribution costs, a higher level of influence over
the direction of kernel development, and more.  It is a situation where
everybody involved wins.  Fire up your editor and come join us; you will be
more than welcome.

.. _addsyscalls:

Adding a New System Call
========================

This document describes what's involved in adding a new system call to the
Linux kernel, over and above the normal submission advice in
:ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`.


System Call Alternatives
------------------------

The first thing to consider when adding a new system call is whether one of
the alternatives might be suitable instead.  Although system calls are the
most traditional and most obvious interaction points between userspace and the
kernel, there are other possibilities -- choose what fits best for your
interface.

 - If the operations involved can be made to look like a filesystem-like
   object, it may make more sense to create a new filesystem or device.  This
   also makes it easier to encapsulate the new functionality in a kernel module
   rather than requiring it to be built into the main kernel.

     - If the new functionality involves operations where the kernel notifies
       userspace that something has happened, then returning a new file
       descriptor for the relevant object allows userspace to use
       ``poll``/``select``/``epoll`` to receive that notification.
     - However, operations that don't map to
       :manpage:`read(2)`/:manpage:`write(2)`-like operations
       have to be implemented as :manpage:`ioctl(2)` requests, which can lead
       to a somewhat opaque API.

 - If you're just exposing runtime system information, a new node in sysfs
   (see ``Documentation/filesystems/sysfs.rst``) or the ``/proc`` filesystem may
   be more appropriate.  However, access to these mechanisms requires that the
   relevant filesystem is mounted, which might not always be the case (e.g.
   in a namespaced/sandboxed/chrooted environment).  Avoid adding any API to
   debugfs, as this is not considered a 'production' interface to userspace.
 - If the operation is specific to a particular file or file descriptor, then
   an additional :manpage:`fcntl(2)` command option may be more appropriate.  However,
   :manpage:`fcntl(2)` is a multiplexing system call that hides a lot of complexity, so
   this option is best for when the new function is closely analogous to
   existing :manpage:`fcntl(2)` functionality, or the new functionality is very simple
   (for example, getting/setting a simple flag related to a file descriptor).
 - If the operation is specific to a particular task or process, then an
   additional :manpage:`prctl(2)` command option may be more appropriate.  As
   with :manpage:`fcntl(2)`, this system call is a complicated multiplexor so
   is best reserved for near-analogs of existing ``prctl()`` commands or
   getting/setting a simple flag related to a process.


Designing the API: Planning for Extension
-----------------------------------------

A new system call forms part of the API of the kernel, and has to be supported
indefinitely.  As such, it's a very good idea to explicitly discuss the
interface on the kernel mailing list, and it's important to plan for future
extensions of the interface.

(The syscall table is littered with historical examples where this wasn't done,
together with the corresponding follow-up system calls --
``eventfd``/``eventfd2``, ``dup2``/``dup3``, ``inotify_init``/``inotify_init1``,
``pipe``/``pipe2``, ``renameat``/``renameat2`` -- so
learn from the history of the kernel and plan for extensions from the start.)

For simpler system calls that only take a couple of arguments, the preferred
way to allow for future extensibility is to include a flags argument to the
system call.  To make sure that userspace programs can safely use flags
between kernel versions, check whether the flags value holds any unknown
flags, and reject the system call (with ``EINVAL``) if it does::

    if (flags & ~(THING_FLAG1 | THING_FLAG2 | THING_FLAG3))
        return -EINVAL;

(If no flags values are used yet, check that the flags argument is zero.)

For more sophisticated system calls that involve a larger number of arguments,
it's preferred to encapsulate the majority of the arguments into a structure
that is passed in by pointer.  Such a structure can cope with future extension
by including a size argument in the structure::

    struct xyzzy_params {
        u32 size; /* userspace sets p->size = sizeof(struct xyzzy_params) */
        u32 param_1;
        u64 param_2;
        u64 param_3;
    };

As long as any subsequently added field, say ``param_4``, is designed so that a
zero value gives the previous behaviour, then this allows both directions of
version mismatch:

 - To cope with a later userspace program calling an older kernel, the kernel
   code should check that any memory beyond the size of the structure that it
   expects is zero (effectively checking that ``param_4 == 0``).
 - To cope with an older userspace program calling a newer kernel, the kernel
   code can zero-extend a smaller instance of the structure (effectively
   setting ``param_4 = 0``).

See :manpage:`perf_event_open(2)` and the ``perf_copy_attr()`` function (in
``kernel/events/core.c``) for an example of this approach.


Designing the API: Other Considerations
---------------------------------------

If your new system call allows userspace to refer to a kernel object, it
should use a file descriptor as the handle for that object -- don't invent a
new type of userspace object handle when the kernel already has mechanisms and
well-defined semantics for using file descriptors.

If your new :manpage:`xyzzy(2)` system call does return a new file descriptor,
then the flags argument should include a value that is equivalent to setting
``O_CLOEXEC`` on the new FD.  This makes it possible for userspace to close
the timing window between ``xyzzy()`` and calling
``fcntl(fd, F_SETFD, FD_CLOEXEC)``, where an unexpected ``fork()`` and
``execve()`` in another thread could leak a descriptor to
the exec'ed program. (However, resist the temptation to re-use the actual value
of the ``O_CLOEXEC`` constant, as it is architecture-specific and is part of a
numbering space of ``O_*`` flags that is fairly full.)

If your system call returns a new file descriptor, you should also consider
what it means to use the :manpage:`poll(2)` family of system calls on that file
descriptor. Making a file descriptor ready for reading or writing is the
normal way for the kernel to indicate to userspace that an event has
occurred on the corresponding kernel object.

If your new :manpage:`xyzzy(2)` system call involves a filename argument::

    int sys_xyzzy(const char __user *path, ..., unsigned int flags);

you should also consider whether an :manpage:`xyzzyat(2)` version is more appropriate::

    int sys_xyzzyat(int dfd, const char __user *path, ..., unsigned int flags);

This allows more flexibility for how userspace specifies the file in question;
in particular it allows userspace to request the functionality for an
already-opened file descriptor using the ``AT_EMPTY_PATH`` flag, effectively
giving an :manpage:`fxyzzy(3)` operation for free::

 - xyzzyat(AT_FDCWD, path, ..., 0) is equivalent to xyzzy(path,...)
 - xyzzyat(fd, "", ..., AT_EMPTY_PATH) is equivalent to fxyzzy(fd, ...)

(For more details on the rationale of the \*at() calls, see the
:manpage:`openat(2)` man page; for an example of AT_EMPTY_PATH, see the
:manpage:`fstatat(2)` man page.)

If your new :manpage:`xyzzy(2)` system call involves a parameter describing an
offset within a file, make its type ``loff_t`` so that 64-bit offsets can be
supported even on 32-bit architectures.

If your new :manpage:`xyzzy(2)` system call involves privileged functionality,
it needs to be governed by the appropriate Linux capability bit (checked with
a call to ``capable()``), as described in the :manpage:`capabilities(7)` man
page.  Choose an existing capability bit that governs related functionality,
but try to avoid combining lots of only vaguely related functions together
under the same bit, as this goes against capabilities' purpose of splitting
the power of root.  In particular, avoid adding new uses of the already
overly-general ``CAP_SYS_ADMIN`` capability.

If your new :manpage:`xyzzy(2)` system call manipulates a process other than
the calling process, it should be restricted (using a call to
``ptrace_may_access()``) so that only a calling process with the same
permissions as the target process, or with the necessary capabilities, can
manipulate the target process.

Finally, be aware that some non-x86 architectures have an easier time if
system call parameters that are explicitly 64-bit fall on odd-numbered
arguments (i.e. parameter 1, 3, 5), to allow use of contiguous pairs of 32-bit
registers.  (This concern does not apply if the arguments are part of a
structure that's passed in by pointer.)


Proposing the API
-----------------

To make new system calls easy to review, it's best to divide up the patchset
into separate chunks.  These should include at least the following items as
distinct commits (each of which is described further below):

 - The core implementation of the system call, together with prototypes,
   generic numbering, Kconfig changes and fallback stub implementation.
 - Wiring up of the new system call for one particular architecture, usually
   x86 (including all of x86_64, x86_32 and x32).
 - A demonstration of the use of the new system call in userspace via a
   selftest in ``tools/testing/selftests/``.
 - A draft man-page for the new system call, either as plain text in the
   cover letter, or as a patch to the (separate) man-pages repository.

New system call proposals, like any change to the kernel's API, should always
be cc'ed to linux-api@vger.kernel.org.


Generic System Call Implementation
----------------------------------

The main entry point for your new :manpage:`xyzzy(2)` system call will be called
``sys_xyzzy()``, but you add this entry point with the appropriate
``SYSCALL_DEFINEn()`` macro rather than explicitly.  The 'n' indicates the
number of arguments to the system call, and the macro takes the system call name
followed by the (type, name) pairs for the parameters as arguments.  Using
this macro allows metadata about the new system call to be made available for
other tools.

The new entry point also needs a corresponding function prototype, in
``include/linux/syscalls.h``, marked as asmlinkage to match the way that system
calls are invoked::

    asmlinkage long sys_xyzzy(...);

Some architectures (e.g. x86) have their own architecture-specific syscall
tables, but several other architectures share a generic syscall table. Add your
new system call to the generic list by adding an entry to the list in
``include/uapi/asm-generic/unistd.h``::

    #define __NR_xyzzy 292
    __SYSCALL(__NR_xyzzy, sys_xyzzy)

Also update the __NR_syscalls count to reflect the additional system call, and
note that if multiple new system calls are added in the same merge window,
your new syscall number may get adjusted to resolve conflicts.

The file ``kernel/sys_ni.c`` provides a fallback stub implementation of each
system call, returning ``-ENOSYS``.  Add your new system call here too::

    COND_SYSCALL(xyzzy);

Your new kernel functionality, and the system call that controls it, should
normally be optional, so add a ``CONFIG`` option (typically to
``init/Kconfig``) for it. As usual for new ``CONFIG`` options:

 - Include a description of the new functionality and system call controlled
   by the option.
 - Make the option depend on EXPERT if it should be hidden from normal users.
 - Make any new source files implementing the function dependent on the CONFIG
   option in the Makefile (e.g. ``obj-$(CONFIG_XYZZY_SYSCALL) += xyzzy.o``).
 - Double check that the kernel still builds with the new CONFIG option turned
   off.

To summarize, you need a commit that includes:

 - ``CONFIG`` option for the new function, normally in ``init/Kconfig``
 - ``SYSCALL_DEFINEn(xyzzy, ...)`` for the entry point
 - corresponding prototype in ``include/linux/syscalls.h``
 - generic table entry in ``include/uapi/asm-generic/unistd.h``
 - fallback stub in ``kernel/sys_ni.c``


x86 System Call Implementation
------------------------------

To wire up your new system call for x86 platforms, you need to update the
master syscall tables.  Assuming your new system call isn't special in some
way (see below), this involves a "common" entry (for x86_64 and x32) in
arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl::

    333   common   xyzzy     sys_xyzzy

and an "i386" entry in ``arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_32.tbl``::

    380   i386     xyzzy     sys_xyzzy

Again, these numbers are liable to be changed if there are conflicts in the
relevant merge window.


Compatibility System Calls (Generic)
------------------------------------

For most system calls the same 64-bit implementation can be invoked even when
the userspace program is itself 32-bit; even if the system call's parameters
include an explicit pointer, this is handled transparently.

However, there are a couple of situations where a compatibility layer is
needed to cope with size differences between 32-bit and 64-bit.

The first is if the 64-bit kernel also supports 32-bit userspace programs, and
so needs to parse areas of (``__user``) memory that could hold either 32-bit or
64-bit values.  In particular, this is needed whenever a system call argument
is:

 - a pointer to a pointer
 - a pointer to a struct containing a pointer (e.g. ``struct iovec __user *``)
 - a pointer to a varying sized integral type (``time_t``, ``off_t``,
   ``long``, ...)
 - a pointer to a struct containing a varying sized integral type.

The second situation that requires a compatibility layer is if one of the
system call's arguments has a type that is explicitly 64-bit even on a 32-bit
architecture, for example ``loff_t`` or ``__u64``.  In this case, a value that
arrives at a 64-bit kernel from a 32-bit application will be split into two
32-bit values, which then need to be re-assembled in the compatibility layer.

(Note that a system call argument that's a pointer to an explicit 64-bit type
does **not** need a compatibility layer; for example, :manpage:`splice(2)`'s arguments of
type ``loff_t __user *`` do not trigger the need for a ``compat_`` system call.)

The compatibility version of the system call is called ``compat_sys_xyzzy()``,
and is added with the ``COMPAT_SYSCALL_DEFINEn()`` macro, analogously to
SYSCALL_DEFINEn.  This version of the implementation runs as part of a 64-bit
kernel, but expects to receive 32-bit parameter values and does whatever is
needed to deal with them.  (Typically, the ``compat_sys_`` version converts the
values to 64-bit versions and either calls on to the ``sys_`` version, or both of
them call a common inner implementation function.)

The compat entry point also needs a corresponding function prototype, in
``include/linux/compat.h``, marked as asmlinkage to match the way that system
calls are invoked::

    asmlinkage long compat_sys_xyzzy(...);

If the system call involves a structure that is laid out differently on 32-bit
and 64-bit systems, say ``struct xyzzy_args``, then the include/linux/compat.h
header file should also include a compat version of the structure (``struct
compat_xyzzy_args``) where each variable-size field has the appropriate
``compat_`` type that corresponds to the type in ``struct xyzzy_args``.  The
``compat_sys_xyzzy()`` routine can then use this ``compat_`` structure to
parse the arguments from a 32-bit invocation.

For example, if there are fields::

    struct xyzzy_args {
        const char __user *ptr;
        __kernel_long_t varying_val;
        u64 fixed_val;
        /* ... */
    };

in struct xyzzy_args, then struct compat_xyzzy_args would have::

    struct compat_xyzzy_args {
        compat_uptr_t ptr;
        compat_long_t varying_val;
        u64 fixed_val;
        /* ... */
    };

The generic system call list also needs adjusting to allow for the compat
version; the entry in ``include/uapi/asm-generic/unistd.h`` should use
``__SC_COMP`` rather than ``__SYSCALL``::

    #define __NR_xyzzy 292
    __SC_COMP(__NR_xyzzy, sys_xyzzy, compat_sys_xyzzy)

To summarize, you need:

 - a ``COMPAT_SYSCALL_DEFINEn(xyzzy, ...)`` for the compat entry point
 - corresponding prototype in ``include/linux/compat.h``
 - (if needed) 32-bit mapping struct in ``include/linux/compat.h``
 - instance of ``__SC_COMP`` not ``__SYSCALL`` in
   ``include/uapi/asm-generic/unistd.h``


Compatibility System Calls (x86)
--------------------------------

To wire up the x86 architecture of a system call with a compatibility version,
the entries in the syscall tables need to be adjusted.

First, the entry in ``arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_32.tbl`` gets an extra
column to indicate that a 32-bit userspace program running on a 64-bit kernel
should hit the compat entry point::

    380   i386     xyzzy     sys_xyzzy    __ia32_compat_sys_xyzzy

Second, you need to figure out what should happen for the x32 ABI version of
the new system call.  There's a choice here: the layout of the arguments
should either match the 64-bit version or the 32-bit version.

If there's a pointer-to-a-pointer involved, the decision is easy: x32 is
ILP32, so the layout should match the 32-bit version, and the entry in
``arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl`` is split so that x32 programs hit
the compatibility wrapper::

    333   64       xyzzy     sys_xyzzy
    ...
    555   x32      xyzzy     __x32_compat_sys_xyzzy

If no pointers are involved, then it is preferable to re-use the 64-bit system
call for the x32 ABI (and consequently the entry in
arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl is unchanged).

In either case, you should check that the types involved in your argument
layout do indeed map exactly from x32 (-mx32) to either the 32-bit (-m32) or
64-bit (-m64) equivalents.


System Calls Returning Elsewhere
--------------------------------

For most system calls, once the system call is complete the user program
continues exactly where it left off -- at the next instruction, with the
stack the same and most of the registers the same as before the system call,
and with the same virtual memory space.

However, a few system calls do things differently.  They might return to a
different location (``rt_sigreturn``) or change the memory space
(``fork``/``vfork``/``clone``) or even architecture (``execve``/``execveat``)
of the program.

To allow for this, the kernel implementation of the system call may need to
save and restore additional registers to the kernel stack, allowing complete
control of where and how execution continues after the system call.

This is arch-specific, but typically involves defining assembly entry points
that save/restore additional registers and invoke the real system call entry
point.

For x86_64, this is implemented as a ``stub_xyzzy`` entry point in
``arch/x86/entry/entry_64.S``, and the entry in the syscall table
(``arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl``) is adjusted to match::

    333   common   xyzzy     stub_xyzzy

The equivalent for 32-bit programs running on a 64-bit kernel is normally
called ``stub32_xyzzy`` and implemented in ``arch/x86/entry/entry_64_compat.S``,
with the corresponding syscall table adjustment in
``arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_32.tbl``::

    380   i386     xyzzy     sys_xyzzy    stub32_xyzzy

If the system call needs a compatibility layer (as in the previous section)
then the ``stub32_`` version needs to call on to the ``compat_sys_`` version
of the system call rather than the native 64-bit version.  Also, if the x32 ABI
implementation is not common with the x86_64 version, then its syscall
table will also need to invoke a stub that calls on to the ``compat_sys_``
version.

For completeness, it's also nice to set up a mapping so that user-mode Linux
still works -- its syscall table will reference stub_xyzzy, but the UML build
doesn't include ``arch/x86/entry/entry_64.S`` implementation (because UML
simulates registers etc).  Fixing this is as simple as adding a #define to
``arch/x86/um/sys_call_table_64.c``::

    #define stub_xyzzy sys_xyzzy


Other Details
-------------

Most of the kernel treats system calls in a generic way, but there is the
occasional exception that may need updating for your particular system call.

The audit subsystem is one such special case; it includes (arch-specific)
functions that classify some special types of system call -- specifically
file open (``open``/``openat``), program execution (``execve``/``exeveat``) or
socket multiplexor (``socketcall``) operations. If your new system call is
analogous to one of these, then the audit system should be updated.

More generally, if there is an existing system call that is analogous to your
new system call, it's worth doing a kernel-wide grep for the existing system
call to check there are no other special cases.


Testing
-------

A new system call should obviously be tested; it is also useful to provide
reviewers with a demonstration of how user space programs will use the system
call.  A good way to combine these aims is to include a simple self-test
program in a new directory under ``tools/testing/selftests/``.

For a new system call, there will obviously be no libc wrapper function and so
the test will need to invoke it using ``syscall()``; also, if the system call
involves a new userspace-visible structure, the corresponding header will need
to be installed to compile the test.

Make sure the selftest runs successfully on all supported architectures.  For
example, check that it works when compiled as an x86_64 (-m64), x86_32 (-m32)
and x32 (-mx32) ABI program.

For more extensive and thorough testing of new functionality, you should also
consider adding tests to the Linux Test Project, or to the xfstests project
for filesystem-related changes.

 - https://linux-test-project.github.io/
 - git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/fs/xfs/xfstests-dev.git


Man Page
--------

All new system calls should come with a complete man page, ideally using groff
markup, but plain text will do.  If groff is used, it's helpful to include a
pre-rendered ASCII version of the man page in the cover email for the
patchset, for the convenience of reviewers.

The man page should be cc'ed to linux-man@vger.kernel.org
For more details, see https://www.kernel.org/doc/man-pages/patches.html


Do not call System Calls in the Kernel
--------------------------------------

System calls are, as stated above, interaction points between userspace and
the kernel.  Therefore, system call functions such as ``sys_xyzzy()`` or
``compat_sys_xyzzy()`` should only be called from userspace via the syscall
table, but not from elsewhere in the kernel.  If the syscall functionality is
useful to be used within the kernel, needs to be shared between an old and a
new syscall, or needs to be shared between a syscall and its compatibility
variant, it should be implemented by means of a "helper" function (such as
``ksys_xyzzy()``).  This kernel function may then be called within the
syscall stub (``sys_xyzzy()``), the compatibility syscall stub
(``compat_sys_xyzzy()``), and/or other kernel code.

At least on 64-bit x86, it will be a hard requirement from v4.17 onwards to not
call system call functions in the kernel.  It uses a different calling
convention for system calls where ``struct pt_regs`` is decoded on-the-fly in a
syscall wrapper which then hands processing over to the actual syscall function.
This means that only those parameters which are actually needed for a specific
syscall are passed on during syscall entry, instead of filling in six CPU
registers with random user space content all the time (which may cause serious
trouble down the call chain).

Moreover, rules on how data may be accessed may differ between kernel data and
user data.  This is another reason why calling ``sys_xyzzy()`` is generally a
bad idea.

Exceptions to this rule are only allowed in architecture-specific overrides,
architecture-specific compatibility wrappers, or other code in arch/.


References and Sources
----------------------

 - LWN article from Michael Kerrisk on use of flags argument in system calls:
   https://lwn.net/Articles/585415/
 - LWN article from Michael Kerrisk on how to handle unknown flags in a system
   call: https://lwn.net/Articles/588444/
 - LWN article from Jake Edge describing constraints on 64-bit system call
   arguments: https://lwn.net/Articles/311630/
 - Pair of LWN articles from David Drysdale that describe the system call
   implementation paths in detail for v3.14:

    - https://lwn.net/Articles/604287/
    - https://lwn.net/Articles/604515/

 - Architecture-specific requirements for system calls are discussed in the
   :manpage:`syscall(2)` man-page:
   http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/syscall.2.html#NOTES
 - Collated emails from Linus Torvalds discussing the problems with ``ioctl()``:
   https://yarchive.net/comp/linux/ioctl.html
 - "How to not invent kernel interfaces", Arnd Bergmann,
   https://www.ukuug.org/events/linux2007/2007/papers/Bergmann.pdf
 - LWN article from Michael Kerrisk on avoiding new uses of CAP_SYS_ADMIN:
   https://lwn.net/Articles/486306/
 - Recommendation from Andrew Morton that all related information for a new
   system call should come in the same email thread:
   https://lore.kernel.org/r/20140724144747.3041b208832bbdf9fbce5d96@linux-foundation.org
 - Recommendation from Michael Kerrisk that a new system call should come with
   a man page: https://lore.kernel.org/r/CAKgNAkgMA39AfoSoA5Pe1r9N+ZzfYQNvNPvcRN7tOvRb8+v06Q@mail.gmail.com
 - Suggestion from Thomas Gleixner that x86 wire-up should be in a separate
   commit: https://lore.kernel.org/r/alpine.DEB.2.11.1411191249560.3909@nanos
 - Suggestion from Greg Kroah-Hartman that it's good for new system calls to
   come with a man-page & selftest: https://lore.kernel.org/r/20140320025530.GA25469@kroah.com
 - Discussion from Michael Kerrisk of new system call vs. :manpage:`prctl(2)` extension:
   https://lore.kernel.org/r/CAHO5Pa3F2MjfTtfNxa8LbnkeeU8=YJ+9tDqxZpw7Gz59E-4AUg@mail.gmail.com
 - Suggestion from Ingo Molnar that system calls that involve multiple
   arguments should encapsulate those arguments in a struct, which includes a
   size field for future extensibility: https://lore.kernel.org/r/20150730083831.GA22182@gmail.com
 - Numbering oddities arising from (re-)use of O_* numbering space flags:

    - commit 75069f2b5bfb ("vfs: renumber FMODE_NONOTIFY and add to uniqueness
      check")
    - commit 12ed2e36c98a ("fanotify: FMODE_NONOTIFY and __O_SYNC in sparc
      conflict")
    - commit bb458c644a59 ("Safer ABI for O_TMPFILE")

 - Discussion from Matthew Wilcox about restrictions on 64-bit arguments:
   https://lore.kernel.org/r/20081212152929.GM26095@parisc-linux.org
 - Recommendation from Greg Kroah-Hartman that unknown flags should be
   policed: https://lore.kernel.org/r/20140717193330.GB4703@kroah.com
 - Recommendation from Linus Torvalds that x32 system calls should prefer
   compatibility with 64-bit versions rather than 32-bit versions:
   https://lore.kernel.org/r/CA+55aFxfmwfB7jbbrXxa=K7VBYPfAvmu3XOkGrLbB1UFjX1+Ew@mail.gmail.com
.. _applying_patches:

Applying Patches To The Linux Kernel
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Original by:
	Jesper Juhl, August 2005

.. note::

   This document is obsolete.  In most cases, rather than using ``patch``
   manually, you'll almost certainly want to look at using Git instead.

A frequently asked question on the Linux Kernel Mailing List is how to apply
a patch to the kernel or, more specifically, what base kernel a patch for
one of the many trees/branches should be applied to. Hopefully this document
will explain this to you.

In addition to explaining how to apply and revert patches, a brief
description of the different kernel trees (and examples of how to apply
their specific patches) is also provided.


What is a patch?
================

A patch is a small text document containing a delta of changes between two
different versions of a source tree. Patches are created with the ``diff``
program.

To correctly apply a patch you need to know what base it was generated from
and what new version the patch will change the source tree into. These
should both be present in the patch file metadata or be possible to deduce
from the filename.


How do I apply or revert a patch?
=================================

You apply a patch with the ``patch`` program. The patch program reads a diff
(or patch) file and makes the changes to the source tree described in it.

Patches for the Linux kernel are generated relative to the parent directory
holding the kernel source dir.

This means that paths to files inside the patch file contain the name of the
kernel source directories it was generated against (or some other directory
names like "a/" and "b/").

Since this is unlikely to match the name of the kernel source dir on your
local machine (but is often useful info to see what version an otherwise
unlabeled patch was generated against) you should change into your kernel
source directory and then strip the first element of the path from filenames
in the patch file when applying it (the ``-p1`` argument to ``patch`` does
this).

To revert a previously applied patch, use the -R argument to patch.
So, if you applied a patch like this::

	patch -p1 < ../patch-x.y.z

You can revert (undo) it like this::

	patch -R -p1 < ../patch-x.y.z


How do I feed a patch/diff file to ``patch``?
=============================================

This (as usual with Linux and other UNIX like operating systems) can be
done in several different ways.

In all the examples below I feed the file (in uncompressed form) to patch
via stdin using the following syntax::

	patch -p1 < path/to/patch-x.y.z

If you just want to be able to follow the examples below and don't want to
know of more than one way to use patch, then you can stop reading this
section here.

Patch can also get the name of the file to use via the -i argument, like
this::

	patch -p1 -i path/to/patch-x.y.z

If your patch file is compressed with gzip or xz and you don't want to
uncompress it before applying it, then you can feed it to patch like this
instead::

	xzcat path/to/patch-x.y.z.xz | patch -p1
	bzcat path/to/patch-x.y.z.gz | patch -p1

If you wish to uncompress the patch file by hand first before applying it
(what I assume you've done in the examples below), then you simply run
gunzip or xz on the file -- like this::

	gunzip patch-x.y.z.gz
	xz -d patch-x.y.z.xz

Which will leave you with a plain text patch-x.y.z file that you can feed to
patch via stdin or the ``-i`` argument, as you prefer.

A few other nice arguments for patch are ``-s`` which causes patch to be silent
except for errors which is nice to prevent errors from scrolling out of the
screen too fast, and ``--dry-run`` which causes patch to just print a listing of
what would happen, but doesn't actually make any changes. Finally ``--verbose``
tells patch to print more information about the work being done.


Common errors when patching
===========================

When patch applies a patch file it attempts to verify the sanity of the
file in different ways.

Checking that the file looks like a valid patch file and checking the code
around the bits being modified matches the context provided in the patch are
just two of the basic sanity checks patch does.

If patch encounters something that doesn't look quite right it has two
options. It can either refuse to apply the changes and abort or it can try
to find a way to make the patch apply with a few minor changes.

One example of something that's not 'quite right' that patch will attempt to
fix up is if all the context matches, the lines being changed match, but the
line numbers are different. This can happen, for example, if the patch makes
a change in the middle of the file but for some reasons a few lines have
been added or removed near the beginning of the file. In that case
everything looks good it has just moved up or down a bit, and patch will
usually adjust the line numbers and apply the patch.

Whenever patch applies a patch that it had to modify a bit to make it fit
it'll tell you about it by saying the patch applied with **fuzz**.
You should be wary of such changes since even though patch probably got it
right it doesn't /always/ get it right, and the result will sometimes be
wrong.

When patch encounters a change that it can't fix up with fuzz it rejects it
outright and leaves a file with a ``.rej`` extension (a reject file). You can
read this file to see exactly what change couldn't be applied, so you can
go fix it up by hand if you wish.

If you don't have any third-party patches applied to your kernel source, but
only patches from kernel.org and you apply the patches in the correct order,
and have made no modifications yourself to the source files, then you should
never see a fuzz or reject message from patch. If you do see such messages
anyway, then there's a high risk that either your local source tree or the
patch file is corrupted in some way. In that case you should probably try
re-downloading the patch and if things are still not OK then you'd be advised
to start with a fresh tree downloaded in full from kernel.org.

Let's look a bit more at some of the messages patch can produce.

If patch stops and presents a ``File to patch:`` prompt, then patch could not
find a file to be patched. Most likely you forgot to specify -p1 or you are
in the wrong directory. Less often, you'll find patches that need to be
applied with ``-p0`` instead of ``-p1`` (reading the patch file should reveal if
this is the case -- if so, then this is an error by the person who created
the patch but is not fatal).

If you get ``Hunk #2 succeeded at 1887 with fuzz 2 (offset 7 lines).`` or a
message similar to that, then it means that patch had to adjust the location
of the change (in this example it needed to move 7 lines from where it
expected to make the change to make it fit).

The resulting file may or may not be OK, depending on the reason the file
was different than expected.

This often happens if you try to apply a patch that was generated against a
different kernel version than the one you are trying to patch.

If you get a message like ``Hunk #3 FAILED at 2387.``, then it means that the
patch could not be applied correctly and the patch program was unable to
fuzz its way through. This will generate a ``.rej`` file with the change that
caused the patch to fail and also a ``.orig`` file showing you the original
content that couldn't be changed.

If you get ``Reversed (or previously applied) patch detected!  Assume -R? [n]``
then patch detected that the change contained in the patch seems to have
already been made.

If you actually did apply this patch previously and you just re-applied it
in error, then just say [n]o and abort this patch. If you applied this patch
previously and actually intended to revert it, but forgot to specify -R,
then you can say [**y**]es here to make patch revert it for you.

This can also happen if the creator of the patch reversed the source and
destination directories when creating the patch, and in that case reverting
the patch will in fact apply it.

A message similar to ``patch: **** unexpected end of file in patch`` or
``patch unexpectedly ends in middle of line`` means that patch could make no
sense of the file you fed to it. Either your download is broken, you tried to
feed patch a compressed patch file without uncompressing it first, or the patch
file that you are using has been mangled by a mail client or mail transfer
agent along the way somewhere, e.g., by splitting a long line into two lines.
Often these warnings can easily be fixed by joining (concatenating) the
two lines that had been split.

As I already mentioned above, these errors should never happen if you apply
a patch from kernel.org to the correct version of an unmodified source tree.
So if you get these errors with kernel.org patches then you should probably
assume that either your patch file or your tree is broken and I'd advise you
to start over with a fresh download of a full kernel tree and the patch you
wish to apply.


Are there any alternatives to ``patch``?
========================================


Yes there are alternatives.

You can use the ``interdiff`` program (http://cyberelk.net/tim/patchutils/) to
generate a patch representing the differences between two patches and then
apply the result.

This will let you move from something like 5.7.2 to 5.7.3 in a single
step. The -z flag to interdiff will even let you feed it patches in gzip or
bzip2 compressed form directly without the use of zcat or bzcat or manual
decompression.

Here's how you'd go from 5.7.2 to 5.7.3 in a single step::

	interdiff -z ../patch-5.7.2.gz ../patch-5.7.3.gz | patch -p1

Although interdiff may save you a step or two you are generally advised to
do the additional steps since interdiff can get things wrong in some cases.

Another alternative is ``ketchup``, which is a python script for automatic
downloading and applying of patches (https://www.selenic.com/ketchup/).

Other nice tools are diffstat, which shows a summary of changes made by a
patch; lsdiff, which displays a short listing of affected files in a patch
file, along with (optionally) the line numbers of the start of each patch;
and grepdiff, which displays a list of the files modified by a patch where
the patch contains a given regular expression.


Where can I download the patches?
=================================

The patches are available at https://kernel.org/
Most recent patches are linked from the front page, but they also have
specific homes.

The 5.x.y (-stable) and 5.x patches live at

	https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/v5.x/

The 5.x.y incremental patches live at

	https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/v5.x/incr/

The -rc patches are not stored on the webserver but are generated on
demand from git tags such as

	https://git.kernel.org/torvalds/p/v5.1-rc1/v5.0

The stable -rc patches live at

	https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/v5.x/stable-review/


The 5.x kernels
===============

These are the base stable releases released by Linus. The highest numbered
release is the most recent.

If regressions or other serious flaws are found, then a -stable fix patch
will be released (see below) on top of this base. Once a new 5.x base
kernel is released, a patch is made available that is a delta between the
previous 5.x kernel and the new one.

To apply a patch moving from 5.6 to 5.7, you'd do the following (note
that such patches do **NOT** apply on top of 5.x.y kernels but on top of the
base 5.x kernel -- if you need to move from 5.x.y to 5.x+1 you need to
first revert the 5.x.y patch).

Here are some examples::

	# moving from 5.6 to 5.7

	$ cd ~/linux-5.6		# change to kernel source dir
	$ patch -p1 < ../patch-5.7	# apply the 5.7 patch
	$ cd ..
	$ mv linux-5.6 linux-5.7	# rename source dir

	# moving from 5.6.1 to 5.7

	$ cd ~/linux-5.6.1		# change to kernel source dir
	$ patch -p1 -R < ../patch-5.6.1	# revert the 5.6.1 patch
					# source dir is now 5.6
	$ patch -p1 < ../patch-5.7	# apply new 5.7 patch
	$ cd ..
	$ mv linux-5.6.1 linux-5.7	# rename source dir


The 5.x.y kernels
=================

Kernels with 3-digit versions are -stable kernels. They contain small(ish)
critical fixes for security problems or significant regressions discovered
in a given 5.x kernel.

This is the recommended branch for users who want the most recent stable
kernel and are not interested in helping test development/experimental
versions.

If no 5.x.y kernel is available, then the highest numbered 5.x kernel is
the current stable kernel.

The -stable team provides normal as well as incremental patches. Below is
how to apply these patches.

Normal patches
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These patches are not incremental, meaning that for example the 5.7.3
patch does not apply on top of the 5.7.2 kernel source, but rather on top
of the base 5.7 kernel source.

So, in order to apply the 5.7.3 patch to your existing 5.7.2 kernel
source you have to first back out the 5.7.2 patch (so you are left with a
base 5.7 kernel source) and then apply the new 5.7.3 patch.

Here's a small example::

	$ cd ~/linux-5.7.2		# change to the kernel source dir
	$ patch -p1 -R < ../patch-5.7.2	# revert the 5.7.2 patch
	$ patch -p1 < ../patch-5.7.3	# apply the new 5.7.3 patch
	$ cd ..
	$ mv linux-5.7.2 linux-5.7.3	# rename the kernel source dir

Incremental patches
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Incremental patches are different: instead of being applied on top
of base 5.x kernel, they are applied on top of previous stable kernel
(5.x.y-1).

Here's the example to apply these::

	$ cd ~/linux-5.7.2		# change to the kernel source dir
	$ patch -p1 < ../patch-5.7.2-3	# apply the new 5.7.3 patch
	$ cd ..
	$ mv linux-5.7.2 linux-5.7.3	# rename the kernel source dir


The -rc kernels
===============

These are release-candidate kernels. These are development kernels released
by Linus whenever he deems the current git (the kernel's source management
tool) tree to be in a reasonably sane state adequate for testing.

These kernels are not stable and you should expect occasional breakage if
you intend to run them. This is however the most stable of the main
development branches and is also what will eventually turn into the next
stable kernel, so it is important that it be tested by as many people as
possible.

This is a good branch to run for people who want to help out testing
development kernels but do not want to run some of the really experimental
stuff (such people should see the sections about -next and -mm kernels below).

The -rc patches are not incremental, they apply to a base 5.x kernel, just
like the 5.x.y patches described above. The kernel version before the -rcN
suffix denotes the version of the kernel that this -rc kernel will eventually
turn into.

So, 5.8-rc5 means that this is the fifth release candidate for the 5.8
kernel and the patch should be applied on top of the 5.7 kernel source.

Here are 3 examples of how to apply these patches::

	# first an example of moving from 5.7 to 5.8-rc3

	$ cd ~/linux-5.7			# change to the 5.7 source dir
	$ patch -p1 < ../patch-5.8-rc3		# apply the 5.8-rc3 patch
	$ cd ..
	$ mv linux-5.7 linux-5.8-rc3		# rename the source dir

	# now let's move from 5.8-rc3 to 5.8-rc5

	$ cd ~/linux-5.8-rc3			# change to the 5.8-rc3 dir
	$ patch -p1 -R < ../patch-5.8-rc3	# revert the 5.8-rc3 patch
	$ patch -p1 < ../patch-5.8-rc5		# apply the new 5.8-rc5 patch
	$ cd ..
	$ mv linux-5.8-rc3 linux-5.8-rc5	# rename the source dir

	# finally let's try and move from 5.7.3 to 5.8-rc5

	$ cd ~/linux-5.7.3			# change to the kernel source dir
	$ patch -p1 -R < ../patch-5.7.3		# revert the 5.7.3 patch
	$ patch -p1 < ../patch-5.8-rc5		# apply new 5.8-rc5 patch
	$ cd ..
	$ mv linux-5.7.3 linux-5.8-rc5		# rename the kernel source dir


The -mm patches and the linux-next tree
=======================================

The -mm patches are experimental patches released by Andrew Morton.

In the past, -mm tree were used to also test subsystem patches, but this
function is now done via the
`linux-next` (https://www.kernel.org/doc/man-pages/linux-next.html)
tree. The Subsystem maintainers push their patches first to linux-next,
and, during the merge window, sends them directly to Linus.

The -mm patches serve as a sort of proving ground for new features and other
experimental patches that aren't merged via a subsystem tree.
Once such patches has proved its worth in -mm for a while Andrew pushes
it on to Linus for inclusion in mainline.

The linux-next tree is daily updated, and includes the -mm patches.
Both are in constant flux and contains many experimental features, a
lot of debugging patches not appropriate for mainline etc., and is the most
experimental of the branches described in this document.

These patches are not appropriate for use on systems that are supposed to be
stable and they are more risky to run than any of the other branches (make
sure you have up-to-date backups -- that goes for any experimental kernel but
even more so for -mm patches or using a Kernel from the linux-next tree).

Testing of -mm patches and linux-next is greatly appreciated since the whole
point of those are to weed out regressions, crashes, data corruption bugs,
build breakage (and any other bug in general) before changes are merged into
the more stable mainline Linus tree.

But testers of -mm and linux-next should be aware that breakages are
more common than in any other tree.


This concludes this list of explanations of the various kernel trees.
I hope you are now clear on how to apply the various patches and help testing
the kernel.

Thank you's to Randy Dunlap, Rolf Eike Beer, Linus Torvalds, Bodo Eggert,
Johannes Stezenbach, Grant Coady, Pavel Machek and others that I may have
forgotten for their reviews and contributions to this document.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===================================
Backporting and conflict resolution
===================================

:Author: Vegard Nossum <vegard.nossum@oracle.com>

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3
    :backlinks: none

Introduction
============

Some developers may never really have to deal with backporting patches,
merging branches, or resolving conflicts in their day-to-day work, so
when a merge conflict does pop up, it can be daunting. Luckily,
resolving conflicts is a skill like any other, and there are many useful
techniques you can use to make the process smoother and increase your
confidence in the result.

This document aims to be a comprehensive, step-by-step guide to
backporting and conflict resolution.

Applying the patch to a tree
============================

Sometimes the patch you are backporting already exists as a git commit,
in which case you just cherry-pick it directly using
``git cherry-pick``. However, if the patch comes from an email, as it
often does for the Linux kernel, you will need to apply it to a tree
using ``git am``.

If you've ever used ``git am``, you probably already know that it is
quite picky about the patch applying perfectly to your source tree. In
fact, you've probably had nightmares about ``.rej`` files and trying to
edit the patch to make it apply.

It is strongly recommended to instead find an appropriate base version
where the patch applies cleanly and *then* cherry-pick it over to your
destination tree, as this will make git output conflict markers and let
you resolve conflicts with the help of git and any other conflict
resolution tools you might prefer to use. For example, if you want to
apply a patch that just arrived on LKML to an older stable kernel, you
can apply it to the most recent mainline kernel and then cherry-pick it
to your older stable branch.

It's generally better to use the exact same base as the one the patch
was generated from, but it doesn't really matter that much as long as it
applies cleanly and isn't too far from the original base. The only
problem with applying the patch to the "wrong" base is that it may pull
in more unrelated changes in the context of the diff when cherry-picking
it to the older branch.

A good reason to prefer ``git cherry-pick`` over ``git am`` is that git
knows the precise history of an existing commit, so it will know when
code has moved around and changed the line numbers; this in turn makes
it less likely to apply the patch to the wrong place (which can result
in silent mistakes or messy conflicts).

If you are using `b4`_. and you are applying the patch directly from an
email, you can use ``b4 am`` with the options ``-g``/``--guess-base``
and ``-3``/``--prep-3way`` to do some of this automatically (see the
`b4 presentation`_ for more information). However, the rest of this
article will assume that you are doing a plain ``git cherry-pick``.

.. _b4: https://people.kernel.org/monsieuricon/introducing-b4-and-patch-attestation
.. _b4 presentation: https://youtu.be/mF10hgVIx9o?t=2996

Once you have the patch in git, you can go ahead and cherry-pick it into
your source tree. Don't forget to cherry-pick with ``-x`` if you want a
written record of where the patch came from!

Note that if you are submitting a patch for stable, the format is
slightly different; the first line after the subject line needs tobe
either::

    commit <upstream commit> upstream

or::

    [ Upstream commit <upstream commit> ]

Resolving conflicts
===================

Uh-oh; the cherry-pick failed with a vaguely threatening message::

    CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict

What to do now?

In general, conflicts appear when the context of the patch (i.e., the
lines being changed and/or the lines surrounding the changes) doesn't
match what's in the tree you are trying to apply the patch *to*.

For backports, what likely happened was that the branch you are
backporting from contains patches not in the branch you are backporting
to. However, the reverse is also possible. In any case, the result is a
conflict that needs to be resolved.

If your attempted cherry-pick fails with a conflict, git automatically
edits the files to include so-called conflict markers showing you where
the conflict is and how the two branches have diverged. Resolving the
conflict typically means editing the end result in such a way that it
takes into account these other commits.

Resolving the conflict can be done either by hand in a regular text
editor or using a dedicated conflict resolution tool.

Many people prefer to use their regular text editor and edit the
conflict directly, as it may be easier to understand what you're doing
and to control the final result. There are definitely pros and cons to
each method, and sometimes there's value in using both.

We will not cover using dedicated merge tools here beyond providing some
pointers to various tools that you could use:

-  `Emacs Ediff mode <https://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/EdiffMode>`__
-  `vimdiff/gvimdiff <https://linux.die.net/man/1/vimdiff>`__
-  `KDiff3 <http://kdiff3.sourceforge.net/>`__
-  `TortoiseMerge <https://tortoisesvn.net/TortoiseMerge.html>`__
-  `Meld <https://meldmerge.org/help/>`__
-  `P4Merge <https://www.perforce.com/products/helix-core-apps/merge-diff-tool-p4merge>`__
-  `Beyond Compare <https://www.scootersoftware.com/>`__
-  `IntelliJ <https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/resolve-conflicts.html>`__
-  `VSCode <https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/versioncontrol>`__

To configure git to work with these, see ``git mergetool --help`` or
the official `git-mergetool documentation`_.

.. _git-mergetool documentation: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-mergetool

Prerequisite patches
--------------------

Most conflicts happen because the branch you are backporting to is
missing some patches compared to the branch you are backporting *from*.
In the more general case (such as merging two independent branches),
development could have happened on either branch, or the branches have
simply diverged -- perhaps your older branch had some other backports
applied to it that themselves needed conflict resolutions, causing a
divergence.

It's important to always identify the commit or commits that caused the
conflict, as otherwise you cannot be confident in the correctness of
your resolution. As an added bonus, especially if the patch is in an
area you're not that familiar with, the changelogs of these commits will
often give you the context to understand the code and potential problems
or pitfalls with your conflict resolution.

git log
~~~~~~~

A good first step is to look at ``git log`` for the file that has the
conflict -- this is usually sufficient when there aren't a lot of
patches to the file, but may get confusing if the file is big and
frequently patched. You should run ``git log`` on the range of commits
between your currently checked-out branch (``HEAD``) and the parent of
the patch you are picking (``<commit>``), i.e.::

    git log HEAD..<commit>^ -- <path>

Even better, if you want to restrict this output to a single function
(because that's where the conflict appears), you can use the following
syntax::

    git log -L:'\<function\>':<path> HEAD..<commit>^

.. note::
     The ``\<`` and ``\>`` around the function name ensure that the
     matches are anchored on a word boundary. This is important, as this
     part is actually a regex and git only follows the first match, so
     if you use ``-L:thread_stack:kernel/fork.c`` it may only give you
     results for the function ``try_release_thread_stack_to_cache`` even
     though there are many other functions in that file containing the
     string ``thread_stack`` in their names.

Another useful option for ``git log`` is ``-G``, which allows you to
filter on certain strings appearing in the diffs of the commits you are
listing::

    git log -G'regex' HEAD..<commit>^ -- <path>

This can also be a handy way to quickly find when something (e.g. a
function call or a variable) was changed, added, or removed. The search
string is a regular expression, which means you can potentially search
for more specific things like assignments to a specific struct member::

    git log -G'\->index\>.*='

git blame
~~~~~~~~~

Another way to find prerequisite commits (albeit only the most recent
one for a given conflict) is to run ``git blame``. In this case, you
need to run it against the parent commit of the patch you are
cherry-picking and the file where the conflict appeared, i.e.::

    git blame <commit>^ -- <path>

This command also accepts the ``-L`` argument (for restricting the
output to a single function), but in this case you specify the filename
at the end of the command as usual::

    git blame -L:'\<function\>' <commit>^ -- <path>

Navigate to the place where the conflict occurred. The first column of
the blame output is the commit ID of the patch that added a given line
of code.

It might be a good idea to ``git show`` these commits and see if they
look like they might be the source of the conflict. Sometimes there will
be more than one of these commits, either because multiple commits
changed different lines of the same conflict area *or* because multiple
subsequent patches changed the same line (or lines) multiple times. In
the latter case, you may have to run ``git blame`` again and specify the
older version of the file to look at in order to dig further back in
the history of the file.

Prerequisite vs. incidental patches
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Having found the patch that caused the conflict, you need to determine
whether it is a prerequisite for the patch you are backporting or
whether it is just incidental and can be skipped. An incidental patch
would be one that touches the same code as the patch you are
backporting, but does not change the semantics of the code in any
material way. For example, a whitespace cleanup patch is completely
incidental -- likewise, a patch that simply renames a function or a
variable would be incidental as well. On the other hand, if the function
being changed does not even exist in your current branch then this would
not be incidental at all and you need to carefully consider whether the
patch adding the function should be cherry-picked first.

If you find that there is a necessary prerequisite patch, then you need
to stop and cherry-pick that instead. If you've already resolved some
conflicts in a different file and don't want to do it again, you can
create a temporary copy of that file.

To abort the current cherry-pick, go ahead and run
``git cherry-pick --abort``, then restart the cherry-picking process
with the commit ID of the prerequisite patch instead.

Understanding conflict markers
------------------------------

Combined diffs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let's say you've decided against picking (or reverting) additional
patches and you just want to resolve the conflict. Git will have
inserted conflict markers into your file. Out of the box, this will look
something like::

    <<<<<<< HEAD
    this is what's in your current tree before cherry-picking
    =======
    this is what the patch wants it to be after cherry-picking
    >>>>>>> <commit>... title

This is what you would see if you opened the file in your editor.
However, if you were to run ``git diff`` without any arguments, the
output would look something like this::

    $ git diff
    [...]
    ++<<<<<<<< HEAD
     +this is what's in your current tree before cherry-picking
    ++========
    + this is what the patch wants it to be after cherry-picking
    ++>>>>>>>> <commit>... title

When you are resolving a conflict, the behavior of ``git diff`` differs
from its normal behavior. Notice the two columns of diff markers
instead of the usual one; this is a so-called "`combined diff`_", here
showing the 3-way diff (or diff-of-diffs) between

#. the current branch (before cherry-picking) and the current working
   directory, and
#. the current branch (before cherry-picking) and the file as it looks
   after the original patch has been applied.

.. _combined diff: https://git-scm.com/docs/diff-format#_combined_diff_format


Better diffs
~~~~~~~~~~~~

3-way combined diffs include all the other changes that happened to the
file between your current branch and the branch you are cherry-picking
from. While this is useful for spotting other changes that you need to
take into account, this also makes the output of ``git diff`` somewhat
intimidating and difficult to read. You may instead prefer to run
``git diff HEAD`` (or ``git diff --ours``) which shows only the diff
between the current branch before cherry-picking and the current working
directory. It looks like this::

    $ git diff HEAD
    [...]
    +<<<<<<<< HEAD
     this is what's in your current tree before cherry-picking
    +========
    +this is what the patch wants it to be after cherry-picking
    +>>>>>>>> <commit>... title

As you can see, this reads just like any other diff and makes it clear
which lines are in the current branch and which lines are being added
because they are part of the merge conflict or the patch being
cherry-picked.

Merge styles and diff3
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The default conflict marker style shown above is known as the ``merge``
style. There is also another style available, known as the ``diff3``
style, which looks like this::

    <<<<<<< HEAD
    this is what is in your current tree before cherry-picking
    ||||||| parent of <commit> (title)
    this is what the patch expected to find there
    =======
    this is what the patch wants it to be after being applied
    >>>>>>> <commit> (title)

As you can see, this has 3 parts instead of 2, and includes what git
expected to find there but didn't. It is *highly recommended* to use
this conflict style as it makes it much clearer what the patch actually
changed; i.e., it allows you to compare the before-and-after versions
of the file for the commit you are cherry-picking. This allows you to
make better decisions about how to resolve the conflict.

To change conflict marker styles, you can use the following command::

    git config merge.conflictStyle diff3

There is a third option, ``zdiff3``, introduced in `Git 2.35`_,
which has the same 3 sections as ``diff3``, but where common lines have
been trimmed off, making the conflict area smaller in some cases.

.. _Git 2.35: https://github.blog/2022-01-24-highlights-from-git-2-35/

Iterating on conflict resolutions
---------------------------------

The first step in any conflict resolution process is to understand the
patch you are backporting. For the Linux kernel this is especially
important, since an incorrect change can lead to the whole system
crashing -- or worse, an undetected security vulnerability.

Understanding the patch can be easy or difficult depending on the patch
itself, the changelog, and your familiarity with the code being changed.
However, a good question for every change (or every hunk of the patch)
might be: "Why is this hunk in the patch?" The answers to these
questions will inform your conflict resolution.

Resolution process
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sometimes the easiest thing to do is to just remove all but the first
part of the conflict, leaving the file essentially unchanged, and apply
the changes by hand. Perhaps the patch is changing a function call
argument from ``0`` to ``1`` while a conflicting change added an
entirely new (and insignificant) parameter to the end of the parameter
list; in that case, it's easy enough to change the argument from ``0``
to ``1`` by hand and leave the rest of the arguments alone. This
technique of manually applying changes is mostly useful if the conflict
pulled in a lot of unrelated context that you don't really need to care
about.

For particularly nasty conflicts with many conflict markers, you can use
``git add`` or ``git add -i`` to selectively stage your resolutions to
get them out of the way; this also lets you use ``git diff HEAD`` to
always see what remains to be resolved or ``git diff --cached`` to see
what your patch looks like so far.

Dealing with file renames
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One of the most annoying things that can happen while backporting a
patch is discovering that one of the files being patched has been
renamed, as that typically means git won't even put in conflict markers,
but will just throw up its hands and say (paraphrased): "Unmerged path!
You do the work..."

There are generally a few ways to deal with this. If the patch to the
renamed file is small, like a one-line change, the easiest thing is to
just go ahead and apply the change by hand and be done with it. On the
other hand, if the change is big or complicated, you definitely don't
want to do it by hand.

As a first pass, you can try something like this, which will lower the
rename detection threshold to 30% (by default, git uses 50%, meaning
that two files need to have at least 50% in common for it to consider
an add-delete pair to be a potential rename)::

  git cherry-pick -strategy=recursive -Xrename-threshold=30

Sometimes the right thing to do will be to also backport the patch that
did the rename, but that's definitely not the most common case. Instead,
what you can do is to temporarily rename the file in the branch you're
backporting to (using ``git mv`` and committing the result), restart the
attempt to cherry-pick the patch, rename the file back (``git mv`` and
committing again), and finally squash the result using ``git rebase -i``
(see the `rebase tutorial`_) so it appears as a single commit when you
are done.

.. _rebase tutorial: https://medium.com/@slamflipstrom/a-beginners-guide-to-squashing-commits-with-git-rebase-8185cf6e62ec

Gotchas
-------

Function arguments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Pay attention to changing function arguments! It's easy to gloss over
details and think that two lines are the same but actually they differ
in some small detail like which variable was passed as an argument
(especially if the two variables are both a single character that look
the same, like i and j).

Error handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you cherry-pick a patch that includes a ``goto`` statement (typically
for error handling), it is absolutely imperative to double check that
the target label is still correct in the branch you are backporting to.
The same goes for added ``return``, ``break``, and ``continue``
statements.

Error handling is typically located at the bottom of the function, so it
may not be part of the conflict even though could have been changed by
other patches.

A good way to ensure that you review the error paths is to always use
``git diff -W`` and ``git show -W`` (AKA ``--function-context``) when
inspecting your changes.  For C code, this will show you the whole
function that's being changed in a patch. One of the things that often
go wrong during backports is that something else in the function changed
on either of the branches that you're backporting from or to. By
including the whole function in the diff you get more context and can
more easily spot problems that might otherwise go unnoticed.

Refactored code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Something that happens quite often is that code gets refactored by
"factoring out" a common code sequence or pattern into a helper
function. When backporting patches to an area where such a refactoring
has taken place, you effectively need to do the reverse when
backporting: a patch to a single location may need to be applied to
multiple locations in the backported version. (One giveaway for this
scenario is that a function was renamed -- but that's not always the
case.)

To avoid incomplete backports, it's worth trying to figure out if the
patch fixes a bug that appears in more than one place. One way to do
this would be to use ``git grep``. (This is actually a good idea to do
in general, not just for backports.) If you do find that the same kind
of fix would apply to other places, it's also worth seeing if those
places exist upstream -- if they don't, it's likely the patch may need
to be adjusted. ``git log`` is your friend to figure out what happened
to these areas as ``git blame`` won't show you code that has been
removed.

If you do find other instances of the same pattern in the upstream tree
and you're not sure whether it's also a bug, it may be worth asking the
patch author. It's not uncommon to find new bugs during backporting!

Verifying the result
====================

colordiff
---------

Having committed a conflict-free new patch, you can now compare your
patch to the original patch. It is highly recommended that you use a
tool such as `colordiff`_ that can show two files side by side and color
them according to the changes between them::

    colordiff -yw -W 200 <(git diff -W <upstream commit>^-) <(git diff -W HEAD^-) | less -SR

.. _colordiff: https://www.colordiff.org/

Here, ``-y`` means to do a side-by-side comparison; ``-w`` ignores
whitespace, and ``-W 200`` sets the width of the output (as otherwise it
will use 130 by default, which is often a bit too little).

The ``rev^-`` syntax is a handy shorthand for ``rev^..rev``, essentially
giving you just the diff for that single commit; also see
the official `git rev-parse documentation`_.

.. _git rev-parse documentation: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rev-parse#_other_rev_parent_shorthand_notations

Again, note the inclusion of ``-W`` for ``git diff``; this ensures that
you will see the full function for any function that has changed.

One incredibly important thing that colordiff does is to highlight lines
that are different. For example, if an error-handling ``goto`` has
changed labels between the original and backported patch, colordiff will
show these side-by-side but highlighted in a different color.  Thus, it
is easy to see that the two ``goto`` statements are jumping to different
labels. Likewise, lines that were not modified by either patch but
differ in the context will also be highlighted and thus stand out during
a manual inspection.

Of course, this is just a visual inspection; the real test is building
and running the patched kernel (or program).

Build testing
-------------

We won't cover runtime testing here, but it can be a good idea to build
just the files touched by the patch as a quick sanity check. For the
Linux kernel you can build single files like this, assuming you have the
``.config`` and build environment set up correctly::

    make path/to/file.o

Note that this won't discover linker errors, so you should still do a
full build after verifying that the single file compiles. By compiling
the single file first you can avoid having to wait for a full build *in
case* there are compiler errors in any of the files you've changed.

Runtime testing
---------------

Even a successful build or boot test is not necessarily enough to rule
out a missing dependency somewhere. Even though the chances are small,
there could be code changes where two independent changes to the same
file result in no conflicts, no compile-time errors, and runtime errors
only in exceptional cases.

One concrete example of this was a pair of patches to the system call
entry code where the first patch saved/restored a register and a later
patch made use of the same register somewhere in the middle of this
sequence. Since there was no overlap between the changes, one could
cherry-pick the second patch, have no conflicts, and believe that
everything was fine, when in fact the code was now scribbling over an
unsaved register.

Although the vast majority of errors will be caught during compilation
or by superficially exercising the code, the only way to *really* verify
a backport is to review the final patch with the same level of scrutiny
as you would (or should) give to any other patch. Having unit tests and
regression tests or other types of automatic testing can help increase
the confidence in the correctness of a backport.

Submitting backports to stable
==============================

As the stable maintainers try to cherry-pick mainline fixes onto their
stable kernels, they may send out emails asking for backports when when
encountering conflicts, see e.g.
<https://lore.kernel.org/stable/2023101528-jawed-shelving-071a@gregkh/>.
These emails typically include the exact steps you need to cherry-pick
the patch to the correct tree and submit the patch.

One thing to make sure is that your changelog conforms to the expected
format::

  <original patch title>
  
  [ Upstream commit <mainline rev> ]
  
  <rest of the original changelog>
  [ <summary of the conflicts and their resolutions> ]
  Signed-off-by: <your name and email>

The "Upstream commit" line is sometimes slightly different depending on
the stable version. Older version used this format::

  commit <mainline rev> upstream.

It is most common to indicate the kernel version the patch applies to
in the email subject line (using e.g.
``git send-email --subject-prefix='PATCH 6.1.y'``), but you can also put
it in the Signed-off-by:-area or below the ``---`` line.

The stable maintainers expect separate submissions for each active
stable version, and each submission should also be tested separately.

A few final words of advice
===========================

1) Approach the backporting process with humility.
2) Understand the patch you are backporting; this means reading both
   the changelog and the code.
3) Be honest about your confidence in the result when submitting the
   patch.
4) Ask relevant maintainers for explicit acks.

Examples
========

The above shows roughly the idealized process of backporting a patch.
For a more concrete example, see this video tutorial where two patches
are backported from mainline to stable:
`Backporting Linux Kernel Patches`_.

.. _Backporting Linux Kernel Patches: https://youtu.be/sBR7R1V2FeA
=================================
(How to avoid) Botching up ioctls
=================================

From: https://blog.ffwll.ch/2013/11/botching-up-ioctls.html

By: Daniel Vetter, Copyright © 2013 Intel Corporation

One clear insight kernel graphics hackers gained in the past few years is that
trying to come up with a unified interface to manage the execution units and
memory on completely different GPUs is a futile effort. So nowadays every
driver has its own set of ioctls to allocate memory and submit work to the GPU.
Which is nice, since there's no more insanity in the form of fake-generic, but
actually only used once interfaces. But the clear downside is that there's much
more potential to screw things up.

To avoid repeating all the same mistakes again I've written up some of the
lessons learned while botching the job for the drm/i915 driver. Most of these
only cover technicalities and not the big-picture issues like what the command
submission ioctl exactly should look like. Learning these lessons is probably
something every GPU driver has to do on its own.


Prerequisites
-------------

First the prerequisites. Without these you have already failed, because you
will need to add a 32-bit compat layer:

 * Only use fixed sized integers. To avoid conflicts with typedefs in userspace
   the kernel has special types like __u32, __s64. Use them.

 * Align everything to the natural size and use explicit padding. 32-bit
   platforms don't necessarily align 64-bit values to 64-bit boundaries, but
   64-bit platforms do. So we always need padding to the natural size to get
   this right.

 * Pad the entire struct to a multiple of 64-bits if the structure contains
   64-bit types - the structure size will otherwise differ on 32-bit versus
   64-bit. Having a different structure size hurts when passing arrays of
   structures to the kernel, or if the kernel checks the structure size, which
   e.g. the drm core does.

 * Pointers are __u64, cast from/to a uintptr_t on the userspace side and
   from/to a void __user * in the kernel. Try really hard not to delay this
   conversion or worse, fiddle the raw __u64 through your code since that
   diminishes the checking tools like sparse can provide. The macro
   u64_to_user_ptr can be used in the kernel to avoid warnings about integers
   and pointers of different sizes.


Basics
------

With the joys of writing a compat layer avoided we can take a look at the basic
fumbles. Neglecting these will make backward and forward compatibility a real
pain. And since getting things wrong on the first attempt is guaranteed you
will have a second iteration or at least an extension for any given interface.

 * Have a clear way for userspace to figure out whether your new ioctl or ioctl
   extension is supported on a given kernel. If you can't rely on old kernels
   rejecting the new flags/modes or ioctls (since doing that was botched in the
   past) then you need a driver feature flag or revision number somewhere.

 * Have a plan for extending ioctls with new flags or new fields at the end of
   the structure. The drm core checks the passed-in size for each ioctl call
   and zero-extends any mismatches between kernel and userspace. That helps,
   but isn't a complete solution since newer userspace on older kernels won't
   notice that the newly added fields at the end get ignored. So this still
   needs a new driver feature flags.

 * Check all unused fields and flags and all the padding for whether it's 0,
   and reject the ioctl if that's not the case. Otherwise your nice plan for
   future extensions is going right down the gutters since someone will submit
   an ioctl struct with random stack garbage in the yet unused parts. Which
   then bakes in the ABI that those fields can never be used for anything else
   but garbage. This is also the reason why you must explicitly pad all
   structures, even if you never use them in an array - the padding the compiler
   might insert could contain garbage.

 * Have simple testcases for all of the above.


Fun with Error Paths
--------------------

Nowadays we don't have any excuse left any more for drm drivers being neat
little root exploits. This means we both need full input validation and solid
error handling paths - GPUs will die eventually in the oddmost corner cases
anyway:

 * The ioctl must check for array overflows. Also it needs to check for
   over/underflows and clamping issues of integer values in general. The usual
   example is sprite positioning values fed directly into the hardware with the
   hardware just having 12 bits or so. Works nicely until some odd display
   server doesn't bother with clamping itself and the cursor wraps around the
   screen.

 * Have simple testcases for every input validation failure case in your ioctl.
   Check that the error code matches your expectations. And finally make sure
   that you only test for one single error path in each subtest by submitting
   otherwise perfectly valid data. Without this an earlier check might reject
   the ioctl already and shadow the codepath you actually want to test, hiding
   bugs and regressions.

 * Make all your ioctls restartable. First X really loves signals and second
   this will allow you to test 90% of all error handling paths by just
   interrupting your main test suite constantly with signals. Thanks to X's
   love for signal you'll get an excellent base coverage of all your error
   paths pretty much for free for graphics drivers. Also, be consistent with
   how you handle ioctl restarting - e.g. drm has a tiny drmIoctl helper in its
   userspace library. The i915 driver botched this with the set_tiling ioctl,
   now we're stuck forever with some arcane semantics in both the kernel and
   userspace.

 * If you can't make a given codepath restartable make a stuck task at least
   killable. GPUs just die and your users won't like you more if you hang their
   entire box (by means of an unkillable X process). If the state recovery is
   still too tricky have a timeout or hangcheck safety net as a last-ditch
   effort in case the hardware has gone bananas.

 * Have testcases for the really tricky corner cases in your error recovery code
   - it's way too easy to create a deadlock between your hangcheck code and
   waiters.


Time, Waiting and Missing it
----------------------------

GPUs do most everything asynchronously, so we have a need to time operations and
wait for outstanding ones. This is really tricky business; at the moment none of
the ioctls supported by the drm/i915 get this fully right, which means there's
still tons more lessons to learn here.

 * Use CLOCK_MONOTONIC as your reference time, always. It's what alsa, drm and
   v4l use by default nowadays. But let userspace know which timestamps are
   derived from different clock domains like your main system clock (provided
   by the kernel) or some independent hardware counter somewhere else. Clocks
   will mismatch if you look close enough, but if performance measuring tools
   have this information they can at least compensate. If your userspace can
   get at the raw values of some clocks (e.g. through in-command-stream
   performance counter sampling instructions) consider exposing those also.

 * Use __s64 seconds plus __u64 nanoseconds to specify time. It's not the most
   convenient time specification, but it's mostly the standard.

 * Check that input time values are normalized and reject them if not. Note
   that the kernel native struct ktime has a signed integer for both seconds
   and nanoseconds, so beware here.

 * For timeouts, use absolute times. If you're a good fellow and made your
   ioctl restartable relative timeouts tend to be too coarse and can
   indefinitely extend your wait time due to rounding on each restart.
   Especially if your reference clock is something really slow like the display
   frame counter. With a spec lawyer hat on this isn't a bug since timeouts can
   always be extended - but users will surely hate you if their neat animations
   starts to stutter due to this.

 * Consider ditching any synchronous wait ioctls with timeouts and just deliver
   an asynchronous event on a pollable file descriptor. It fits much better
   into event driven applications' main loop.

 * Have testcases for corner-cases, especially whether the return values for
   already-completed events, successful waits and timed-out waits are all sane
   and suiting to your needs.


Leaking Resources, Not
----------------------

A full-blown drm driver essentially implements a little OS, but specialized to
the given GPU platforms. This means a driver needs to expose tons of handles
for different objects and other resources to userspace. Doing that right
entails its own little set of pitfalls:

 * Always attach the lifetime of your dynamically created resources to the
   lifetime of a file descriptor. Consider using a 1:1 mapping if your resource
   needs to be shared across processes -  fd-passing over unix domain sockets
   also simplifies lifetime management for userspace.

 * Always have O_CLOEXEC support.

 * Ensure that you have sufficient insulation between different clients. By
   default pick a private per-fd namespace which forces any sharing to be done
   explicitly. Only go with a more global per-device namespace if the objects
   are truly device-unique. One counterexample in the drm modeset interfaces is
   that the per-device modeset objects like connectors share a namespace with
   framebuffer objects, which mostly are not shared at all. A separate
   namespace, private by default, for framebuffers would have been more
   suitable.

 * Think about uniqueness requirements for userspace handles. E.g. for most drm
   drivers it's a userspace bug to submit the same object twice in the same
   command submission ioctl. But then if objects are shareable userspace needs
   to know whether it has seen an imported object from a different process
   already or not. I haven't tried this myself yet due to lack of a new class
   of objects, but consider using inode numbers on your shared file descriptors
   as unique identifiers - it's how real files are told apart, too.
   Unfortunately this requires a full-blown virtual filesystem in the kernel.


Last, but not Least
-------------------

Not every problem needs a new ioctl:

 * Think hard whether you really want a driver-private interface. Of course
   it's much quicker to push a driver-private interface than engaging in
   lengthy discussions for a more generic solution. And occasionally doing a
   private interface to spearhead a new concept is what's required. But in the
   end, once the generic interface comes around you'll end up maintaining two
   interfaces. Indefinitely.

 * Consider other interfaces than ioctls. A sysfs attribute is much better for
   per-device settings, or for child objects with fairly static lifetimes (like
   output connectors in drm with all the detection override attributes). Or
   maybe only your testsuite needs this interface, and then debugfs with its
   disclaimer of not having a stable ABI would be better.

Finally, the name of the game is to get it right on the first attempt, since if
your driver proves popular and your hardware platforms long-lived then you'll
be stuck with a given ioctl essentially forever. You can try to deprecate
horrible ioctls on newer iterations of your hardware, but generally it takes
years to accomplish this. And then again years until the last user able to
complain about regressions disappears, too.
.. _changes:

Minimal requirements to compile the Kernel
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Intro
=====

This document is designed to provide a list of the minimum levels of
software necessary to run the current kernel version.

This document is originally based on my "Changes" file for 2.0.x kernels
and therefore owes credit to the same people as that file (Jared Mauch,
Axel Boldt, Alessandro Sigala, and countless other users all over the
'net).

Current Minimal Requirements
****************************

Upgrade to at **least** these software revisions before thinking you've
encountered a bug!  If you're unsure what version you're currently
running, the suggested command should tell you.

Again, keep in mind that this list assumes you are already functionally
running a Linux kernel.  Also, not all tools are necessary on all
systems; obviously, if you don't have any PC Card hardware, for example,
you probably needn't concern yourself with pcmciautils.

====================== ===============  ========================================
        Program        Minimal version       Command to check the version
====================== ===============  ========================================
GNU C                  5.1              gcc --version
Clang/LLVM (optional)  13.0.1           clang --version
Rust (optional)        1.78.0           rustc --version
bindgen (optional)     0.65.1           bindgen --version
GNU make               4.0              make --version
bash                   4.2              bash --version
binutils               2.25             ld -v
flex                   2.5.35           flex --version
bison                  2.0              bison --version
pahole                 1.16             pahole --version
util-linux             2.10o            mount --version
kmod                   13               depmod -V
e2fsprogs              1.41.4           e2fsck -V
jfsutils               1.1.3            fsck.jfs -V
reiserfsprogs          3.6.3            reiserfsck -V
xfsprogs               2.6.0            xfs_db -V
squashfs-tools         4.0              mksquashfs -version
btrfs-progs            0.18             btrfsck
pcmciautils            004              pccardctl -V
quota-tools            3.09             quota -V
PPP                    2.4.0            pppd --version
nfs-utils              1.0.5            showmount --version
procps                 3.2.0            ps --version
udev                   081              udevd --version
grub                   0.93             grub --version || grub-install --version
mcelog                 0.6              mcelog --version
iptables               1.4.2            iptables -V
openssl & libcrypto    1.0.0            openssl version
bc                     1.06.95          bc --version
Sphinx\ [#f1]_         2.4.4            sphinx-build --version
cpio                   any              cpio --version
GNU tar                1.28             tar --version
gtags (optional)       6.6.5            gtags --version
mkimage (optional)     2017.01          mkimage --version
Python (optional)      3.5.x            python3 --version
GNU AWK (optional)     5.1.0            gawk --version
====================== ===============  ========================================

.. [#f1] Sphinx is needed only to build the Kernel documentation

Kernel compilation
******************

GCC
---

The gcc version requirements may vary depending on the type of CPU in your
computer.

Clang/LLVM (optional)
---------------------

The latest formal release of clang and LLVM utils (according to
`releases.llvm.org <https://releases.llvm.org>`_) are supported for building
kernels. Older releases aren't guaranteed to work, and we may drop workarounds
from the kernel that were used to support older versions. Please see additional
docs on :ref:`Building Linux with Clang/LLVM <kbuild_llvm>`.

Rust (optional)
---------------

A recent version of the Rust compiler is required.

Please see Documentation/rust/quick-start.rst for instructions on how to
satisfy the build requirements of Rust support. In particular, the ``Makefile``
target ``rustavailable`` is useful to check why the Rust toolchain may not
be detected.

bindgen (optional)
------------------

``bindgen`` is used to generate the Rust bindings to the C side of the kernel.
It depends on ``libclang``.

Make
----

You will need GNU make 4.0 or later to build the kernel.

Bash
----

Some bash scripts are used for the kernel build.
Bash 4.2 or newer is needed.

Binutils
--------

Binutils 2.25 or newer is needed to build the kernel.

pkg-config
----------

The build system, as of 4.18, requires pkg-config to check for installed
kconfig tools and to determine flags settings for use in
'make {g,x}config'.  Previously pkg-config was being used but not
verified or documented.

Flex
----

Since Linux 4.16, the build system generates lexical analyzers
during build.  This requires flex 2.5.35 or later.


Bison
-----

Since Linux 4.16, the build system generates parsers
during build.  This requires bison 2.0 or later.

pahole
------

Since Linux 5.2, if CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO_BTF is selected, the build system
generates BTF (BPF Type Format) from DWARF in vmlinux, a bit later from kernel
modules as well.  This requires pahole v1.16 or later.

It is found in the 'dwarves' or 'pahole' distro packages or from
https://fedorapeople.org/~acme/dwarves/.

Perl
----

You will need perl 5 and the following modules: ``Getopt::Long``,
``Getopt::Std``, ``File::Basename``, and ``File::Find`` to build the kernel.

BC
--

You will need bc to build kernels 3.10 and higher


OpenSSL
-------

Module signing and external certificate handling use the OpenSSL program and
crypto library to do key creation and signature generation.

You will need openssl to build kernels 3.7 and higher if module signing is
enabled.  You will also need openssl development packages to build kernels 4.3
and higher.

Tar
---

GNU tar is needed if you want to enable access to the kernel headers via sysfs
(CONFIG_IKHEADERS).

gtags / GNU GLOBAL (optional)
-----------------------------

The kernel build requires GNU GLOBAL version 6.6.5 or later to generate
tag files through ``make gtags``.  This is due to its use of the gtags
``-C (--directory)`` flag.

mkimage
-------

This tool is used when building a Flat Image Tree (FIT), commonly used on ARM
platforms. The tool is available via the ``u-boot-tools`` package or can be
built from the U-Boot source code. See the instructions at
https://docs.u-boot.org/en/latest/build/tools.html#building-tools-for-linux

GNU AWK
-------

GNU AWK is needed if you want kernel builds to generate address range data for
builtin modules (CONFIG_BUILTIN_MODULE_RANGES).

System utilities
****************

Architectural changes
---------------------

DevFS has been obsoleted in favour of udev
(https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/kernel/hotplug/)

32-bit UID support is now in place.  Have fun!

Linux documentation for functions is transitioning to inline
documentation via specially-formatted comments near their
definitions in the source.  These comments can be combined with ReST
files the Documentation/ directory to make enriched documentation, which can
then be converted to PostScript, HTML, LaTex, ePUB and PDF files.
In order to convert from ReST format to a format of your choice, you'll need
Sphinx.

Util-linux
----------

New versions of util-linux provide ``fdisk`` support for larger disks,
support new options to mount, recognize more supported partition
types, and similar goodies.
You'll probably want to upgrade.

Ksymoops
--------

If the unthinkable happens and your kernel oopses, you may need the
ksymoops tool to decode it, but in most cases you don't.
It is generally preferred to build the kernel with ``CONFIG_KALLSYMS`` so
that it produces readable dumps that can be used as-is (this also
produces better output than ksymoops).  If for some reason your kernel
is not build with ``CONFIG_KALLSYMS`` and you have no way to rebuild and
reproduce the Oops with that option, then you can still decode that Oops
with ksymoops.

Mkinitrd
--------

These changes to the ``/lib/modules`` file tree layout also require that
mkinitrd be upgraded.

E2fsprogs
---------

The latest version of ``e2fsprogs`` fixes several bugs in fsck and
debugfs.  Obviously, it's a good idea to upgrade.

JFSutils
--------

The ``jfsutils`` package contains the utilities for the file system.
The following utilities are available:

- ``fsck.jfs`` - initiate replay of the transaction log, and check
  and repair a JFS formatted partition.

- ``mkfs.jfs`` - create a JFS formatted partition.

- other file system utilities are also available in this package.

Reiserfsprogs
-------------

The reiserfsprogs package should be used for reiserfs-3.6.x
(Linux kernels 2.4.x). It is a combined package and contains working
versions of ``mkreiserfs``, ``resize_reiserfs``, ``debugreiserfs`` and
``reiserfsck``. These utils work on both i386 and alpha platforms.

Xfsprogs
--------

The latest version of ``xfsprogs`` contains ``mkfs.xfs``, ``xfs_db``, and the
``xfs_repair`` utilities, among others, for the XFS filesystem.  It is
architecture independent and any version from 2.0.0 onward should
work correctly with this version of the XFS kernel code (2.6.0 or
later is recommended, due to some significant improvements).

PCMCIAutils
-----------

PCMCIAutils replaces ``pcmcia-cs``. It properly sets up
PCMCIA sockets at system startup and loads the appropriate modules
for 16-bit PCMCIA devices if the kernel is modularized and the hotplug
subsystem is used.

Quota-tools
-----------

Support for 32 bit uid's and gid's is required if you want to use
the newer version 2 quota format.  Quota-tools version 3.07 and
newer has this support.  Use the recommended version or newer
from the table above.

Intel IA32 microcode
--------------------

A driver has been added to allow updating of Intel IA32 microcode,
accessible as a normal (misc) character device.  If you are not using
udev you may need to::

  mkdir /dev/cpu
  mknod /dev/cpu/microcode c 10 184
  chmod 0644 /dev/cpu/microcode

as root before you can use this.  You'll probably also want to
get the user-space microcode_ctl utility to use with this.

udev
----

``udev`` is a userspace application for populating ``/dev`` dynamically with
only entries for devices actually present. ``udev`` replaces the basic
functionality of devfs, while allowing persistent device naming for
devices.

FUSE
----

Needs libfuse 2.4.0 or later.  Absolute minimum is 2.3.0 but mount
options ``direct_io`` and ``kernel_cache`` won't work.

Networking
**********

General changes
---------------

If you have advanced network configuration needs, you should probably
consider using the network tools from ip-route2.

Packet Filter / NAT
-------------------
The packet filtering and NAT code uses the same tools like the previous 2.4.x
kernel series (iptables).  It still includes backwards-compatibility modules
for 2.2.x-style ipchains and 2.0.x-style ipfwadm.

PPP
---

The PPP driver has been restructured to support multilink and to
enable it to operate over diverse media layers.  If you use PPP,
upgrade pppd to at least 2.4.0.

If you are not using udev, you must have the device file /dev/ppp
which can be made by::

  mknod /dev/ppp c 108 0

as root.

NFS-utils
---------

In ancient (2.4 and earlier) kernels, the nfs server needed to know
about any client that expected to be able to access files via NFS.  This
information would be given to the kernel by ``mountd`` when the client
mounted the filesystem, or by ``exportfs`` at system startup.  exportfs
would take information about active clients from ``/var/lib/nfs/rmtab``.

This approach is quite fragile as it depends on rmtab being correct
which is not always easy, particularly when trying to implement
fail-over.  Even when the system is working well, ``rmtab`` suffers from
getting lots of old entries that never get removed.

With modern kernels we have the option of having the kernel tell mountd
when it gets a request from an unknown host, and mountd can give
appropriate export information to the kernel.  This removes the
dependency on ``rmtab`` and means that the kernel only needs to know about
currently active clients.

To enable this new functionality, you need to::

  mount -t nfsd nfsd /proc/fs/nfsd

before running exportfs or mountd.  It is recommended that all NFS
services be protected from the internet-at-large by a firewall where
that is possible.

mcelog
------

On x86 kernels the mcelog utility is needed to process and log machine check
events when ``CONFIG_X86_MCE`` is enabled. Machine check events are errors
reported by the CPU. Processing them is strongly encouraged.

Kernel documentation
********************

Sphinx
------

Please see :ref:`sphinx_install` in :ref:`Documentation/doc-guide/sphinx.rst <sphinxdoc>`
for details about Sphinx requirements.

rustdoc
-------

``rustdoc`` is used to generate the documentation for Rust code. Please see
Documentation/rust/general-information.rst for more information.

Getting updated software
========================

Kernel compilation
******************

gcc
---

- <ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gcc/>

Clang/LLVM
----------

- :ref:`Getting LLVM <getting_llvm>`.

Rust
----

- Documentation/rust/quick-start.rst.

bindgen
-------

- Documentation/rust/quick-start.rst.

Make
----

- <ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/make/>

Bash
----

- <ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/bash/>

Binutils
--------

- <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/devel/binutils/>

Flex
----

- <https://github.com/westes/flex/releases>

Bison
-----

- <ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/bison/>

OpenSSL
-------

- <https://www.openssl.org/>

System utilities
****************

Util-linux
----------

- <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/util-linux/>

Kmod
----

- <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/kernel/kmod/>
- <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/utils/kernel/kmod/kmod.git>

Ksymoops
--------

- <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/kernel/ksymoops/v2.4/>

Mkinitrd
--------

- <https://code.launchpad.net/initrd-tools/main>

E2fsprogs
---------

- <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/people/tytso/e2fsprogs/>
- <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/fs/ext2/e2fsprogs.git/>

JFSutils
--------

- <https://jfs.sourceforge.net/>

Reiserfsprogs
-------------

- <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/jeffm/reiserfsprogs.git/>

Xfsprogs
--------

- <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/fs/xfs/xfsprogs-dev.git>
- <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/fs/xfs/xfsprogs/>

Pcmciautils
-----------

- <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/kernel/pcmcia/>

Quota-tools
-----------

- <https://sourceforge.net/projects/linuxquota/>


Intel P6 microcode
------------------

- <https://downloadcenter.intel.com/>

udev
----

- <https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/udev.html>

FUSE
----

- <https://github.com/libfuse/libfuse/releases>

mcelog
------

- <https://www.mcelog.org/>

cpio
----

- <https://www.gnu.org/software/cpio/>

Networking
**********

PPP
---

- <https://download.samba.org/pub/ppp/>
- <https://git.ozlabs.org/?p=ppp.git>
- <https://github.com/paulusmack/ppp/>

NFS-utils
---------

- <https://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=14>
- <https://nfs.sourceforge.net/>

Iptables
--------

- <https://netfilter.org/projects/iptables/index.html>

Ip-route2
---------

- <https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/utils/net/iproute2/>

OProfile
--------

- <https://oprofile.sf.net/download/>

Kernel documentation
********************

Sphinx
------

- <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>
.. _code_of_conduct_interpretation:

Linux Kernel Contributor Covenant Code of Conduct Interpretation
================================================================

The :ref:`code_of_conduct` is a general document meant to
provide a set of rules for almost any open source community.  Every
open-source community is unique and the Linux kernel is no exception.
Because of this, this document describes how we in the Linux kernel
community will interpret it.  We also do not expect this interpretation
to be static over time, and will adjust it as needed.

The Linux kernel development effort is a very personal process compared
to "traditional" ways of developing software.  Your contributions and
ideas behind them will be carefully reviewed, often resulting in
critique and criticism.  The review will almost always require
improvements before the material can be included in the
kernel.  Know that this happens because everyone involved wants to see
the best possible solution for the overall success of Linux.  This
development process has been proven to create the most robust operating
system kernel ever, and we do not want to do anything to cause the
quality of submission and eventual result to ever decrease.

Maintainers
-----------

The Code of Conduct uses the term "maintainers" numerous times.  In the
kernel community, a "maintainer" is anyone who is responsible for a
subsystem, driver, or file, and is listed in the MAINTAINERS file in the
kernel source tree.

Responsibilities
----------------

The Code of Conduct mentions rights and responsibilities for
maintainers, and this needs some further clarifications.

First and foremost, it is a reasonable expectation to have maintainers
lead by example.

That being said, our community is vast and broad, and there is no new
requirement for maintainers to unilaterally handle how other people
behave in the parts of the community where they are active.  That
responsibility is upon all of us, and ultimately the Code of Conduct
documents final escalation paths in case of unresolved concerns
regarding conduct issues.

Maintainers should be willing to help when problems occur, and work with
others in the community when needed.  Do not be afraid to reach out to
the Technical Advisory Board (TAB) or other maintainers if you're
uncertain how to handle situations that come up.  It will not be
considered a violation report unless you want it to be.  If you are
uncertain about approaching the TAB or any other maintainers, please
reach out to our conflict mediator, Joanna Lee <jlee@linuxfoundation.org>.

In the end, "be kind to each other" is really what the end goal is for
everybody.  We know everyone is human and we all fail at times, but the
primary goal for all of us should be to work toward amicable resolutions
of problems.  Enforcement of the code of conduct will only be a last
resort option.

Our goal of creating a robust and technically advanced operating system
and the technical complexity involved naturally require expertise and
decision-making.

The required expertise varies depending on the area of contribution.  It
is determined mainly by context and technical complexity and only
secondary by the expectations of contributors and maintainers.

Both the expertise expectations and decision-making are subject to
discussion, but at the very end there is a basic necessity to be able to
make decisions in order to make progress.  This prerogative is in the
hands of maintainers and project's leadership and is expected to be used
in good faith.

As a consequence, setting expertise expectations, making decisions and
rejecting unsuitable contributions are not viewed as a violation of the
Code of Conduct.

While maintainers are in general welcoming to newcomers, their capacity
of helping contributors overcome the entry hurdles is limited, so they
have to set priorities.  This, also, is not to be seen as a violation of
the Code of Conduct.  The kernel community is aware of that and provides
entry level programs in various forms like kernelnewbies.org.

Scope
-----

The Linux kernel community primarily interacts on a set of public email
lists distributed around a number of different servers controlled by a
number of different companies or individuals.  All of these lists are
defined in the MAINTAINERS file in the kernel source tree.  Any emails
sent to those mailing lists are considered covered by the Code of
Conduct.

Developers who use the kernel.org bugzilla, and other subsystem bugzilla
or bug tracking tools should follow the guidelines of the Code of
Conduct.  The Linux kernel community does not have an "official" project
email address, or "official" social media address.  Any activity
performed using a kernel.org email account must follow the Code of
Conduct as published for kernel.org, just as any individual using a
corporate email account must follow the specific rules of that
corporation.

The Code of Conduct does not prohibit continuing to include names, email
addresses, and associated comments in mailing list messages, kernel
change log messages, or code comments.

Interaction in other forums is covered by whatever rules apply to said
forums and is in general not covered by the Code of Conduct.  Exceptions
may be considered for extreme circumstances.

Contributions submitted for the kernel should use appropriate language.
Content that already exists predating the Code of Conduct will not be
addressed now as a violation.  Inappropriate language can be seen as a
bug, though; such bugs will be fixed more quickly if any interested
parties submit patches to that effect.  Expressions that are currently
part of the user/kernel API, or reflect terminology used in published
standards or specifications, are not considered bugs.

Enforcement
-----------

The address listed in the Code of Conduct goes to the Code of Conduct
Committee.  The exact members receiving these emails at any given time
are listed at https://kernel.org/code-of-conduct.html.  Members can not
access reports made before they joined or after they have left the
committee.

The Code of Conduct Committee consists of volunteer community members
appointed by the TAB, as well as a professional mediator acting as a
neutral third party.  The processes the Code of Conduct committee will
use to address reports is varied and will depend on the individual
circumstance, however, this file serves as documentation for the
general process used.

Any member of the committee, including the mediator, can be contacted
directly if a reporter does not wish to include the full committee in a
complaint or concern.

The Code of Conduct Committee reviews the cases according to the
processes (see above) and consults with the TAB as needed and
appropriate, for instance to request and receive information about the
kernel community.

Any decisions regarding enforcement recommendations will be brought to
the TAB for implementation of enforcement with the relevant maintainers
if needed.  A decision by the Code of Conduct Committee can be overturned
by the TAB by a two-thirds vote.

At quarterly intervals, the Code of Conduct Committee and TAB will
provide a report summarizing the anonymised reports that the Code of
Conduct committee has received and their status, as well details of any
overridden decisions including complete and identifiable voting details.

Because how we interpret and enforce the Code of Conduct will evolve over
time, this document will be updated when necessary to reflect any
changes.
.. _code_of_conduct:

Contributor Covenant Code of Conduct
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Our Pledge
==========

In the interest of fostering an open and welcoming environment, we as
contributors and maintainers pledge to making participation in our project and
our community a harassment-free experience for everyone, regardless of age, body
size, disability, ethnicity, sex characteristics, gender identity and
expression, level of experience, education, socio-economic status, nationality,
personal appearance, race, religion, or sexual identity and orientation.

Our Standards
=============

Examples of behavior that contributes to creating a positive environment
include:

* Using welcoming and inclusive language
* Being respectful of differing viewpoints and experiences
* Gracefully accepting constructive criticism
* Focusing on what is best for the community
* Showing empathy towards other community members


Examples of unacceptable behavior by participants include:

* The use of sexualized language or imagery and unwelcome sexual attention or
  advances
* Trolling, insulting/derogatory comments, and personal or political attacks
* Public or private harassment
* Publishing others’ private information, such as a physical or electronic
  address, without explicit permission
* Other conduct which could reasonably be considered inappropriate in a
  professional setting


Our Responsibilities
====================

Maintainers are responsible for clarifying the standards of acceptable behavior
and are expected to take appropriate and fair corrective action in response to
any instances of unacceptable behavior.

Maintainers have the right and responsibility to remove, edit, or reject
comments, commits, code, wiki edits, issues, and other contributions that are
not aligned to this Code of Conduct, or to ban temporarily or permanently any
contributor for other behaviors that they deem inappropriate, threatening,
offensive, or harmful.

Scope
=====

This Code of Conduct applies both within project spaces and in public spaces
when an individual is representing the project or its community. Examples of
representing a project or community include using an official project e-mail
address, posting via an official social media account, or acting as an appointed
representative at an online or offline event. Representation of a project may be
further defined and clarified by project maintainers.

Enforcement
===========

Instances of abusive, harassing, or otherwise unacceptable behavior may be
reported by contacting the Code of Conduct Committee at
<conduct@kernel.org>. All complaints will be reviewed and investigated
and will result in a response that is deemed necessary and appropriate
to the circumstances. The Code of Conduct Committee is obligated to
maintain confidentiality with regard to the reporter of an incident.
Further details of specific enforcement policies may be posted
separately.

Attribution
===========

This Code of Conduct is adapted from the Contributor Covenant, version 1.4,
available at https://www.contributor-covenant.org/version/1/4/code-of-conduct.html

Interpretation
==============

See the :ref:`code_of_conduct_interpretation` document for how the Linux
kernel community will be interpreting this document.
.. _codingstyle:

Linux kernel coding style
=========================

This is a short document describing the preferred coding style for the
linux kernel.  Coding style is very personal, and I won't **force** my
views on anybody, but this is what goes for anything that I have to be
able to maintain, and I'd prefer it for most other things too.  Please
at least consider the points made here.

First off, I'd suggest printing out a copy of the GNU coding standards,
and NOT read it.  Burn them, it's a great symbolic gesture.

Anyway, here goes:


1) Indentation
--------------

Tabs are 8 characters, and thus indentations are also 8 characters.
There are heretic movements that try to make indentations 4 (or even 2!)
characters deep, and that is akin to trying to define the value of PI to
be 3.

Rationale: The whole idea behind indentation is to clearly define where
a block of control starts and ends.  Especially when you've been looking
at your screen for 20 straight hours, you'll find it a lot easier to see
how the indentation works if you have large indentations.

Now, some people will claim that having 8-character indentations makes
the code move too far to the right, and makes it hard to read on a
80-character terminal screen.  The answer to that is that if you need
more than 3 levels of indentation, you're screwed anyway, and should fix
your program.

In short, 8-char indents make things easier to read, and have the added
benefit of warning you when you're nesting your functions too deep.
Heed that warning.

The preferred way to ease multiple indentation levels in a switch statement is
to align the ``switch`` and its subordinate ``case`` labels in the same column
instead of ``double-indenting`` the ``case`` labels.  E.g.:

.. code-block:: c

	switch (suffix) {
	case 'G':
	case 'g':
		mem <<= 30;
		break;
	case 'M':
	case 'm':
		mem <<= 20;
		break;
	case 'K':
	case 'k':
		mem <<= 10;
		fallthrough;
	default:
		break;
	}

Don't put multiple statements on a single line unless you have
something to hide:

.. code-block:: c

	if (condition) do_this;
	  do_something_everytime;

Don't use commas to avoid using braces:

.. code-block:: c

	if (condition)
		do_this(), do_that();

Always uses braces for multiple statements:

.. code-block:: c

	if (condition) {
		do_this();
		do_that();
	}

Don't put multiple assignments on a single line either.  Kernel coding style
is super simple.  Avoid tricky expressions.


Outside of comments, documentation and except in Kconfig, spaces are never
used for indentation, and the above example is deliberately broken.

Get a decent editor and don't leave whitespace at the end of lines.


2) Breaking long lines and strings
----------------------------------

Coding style is all about readability and maintainability using commonly
available tools.

The preferred limit on the length of a single line is 80 columns.

Statements longer than 80 columns should be broken into sensible chunks,
unless exceeding 80 columns significantly increases readability and does
not hide information.

Descendants are always substantially shorter than the parent and
are placed substantially to the right.  A very commonly used style
is to align descendants to a function open parenthesis.

These same rules are applied to function headers with a long argument list.

However, never break user-visible strings such as printk messages because
that breaks the ability to grep for them.


3) Placing Braces and Spaces
----------------------------

The other issue that always comes up in C styling is the placement of
braces.  Unlike the indent size, there are few technical reasons to
choose one placement strategy over the other, but the preferred way, as
shown to us by the prophets Kernighan and Ritchie, is to put the opening
brace last on the line, and put the closing brace first, thusly:

.. code-block:: c

	if (x is true) {
		we do y
	}

This applies to all non-function statement blocks (if, switch, for,
while, do).  E.g.:

.. code-block:: c

	switch (action) {
	case KOBJ_ADD:
		return "add";
	case KOBJ_REMOVE:
		return "remove";
	case KOBJ_CHANGE:
		return "change";
	default:
		return NULL;
	}

However, there is one special case, namely functions: they have the
opening brace at the beginning of the next line, thus:

.. code-block:: c

	int function(int x)
	{
		body of function
	}

Heretic people all over the world have claimed that this inconsistency
is ...  well ...  inconsistent, but all right-thinking people know that
(a) K&R are **right** and (b) K&R are right.  Besides, functions are
special anyway (you can't nest them in C).

Note that the closing brace is empty on a line of its own, **except** in
the cases where it is followed by a continuation of the same statement,
ie a ``while`` in a do-statement or an ``else`` in an if-statement, like
this:

.. code-block:: c

	do {
		body of do-loop
	} while (condition);

and

.. code-block:: c

	if (x == y) {
		..
	} else if (x > y) {
		...
	} else {
		....
	}

Rationale: K&R.

Also, note that this brace-placement also minimizes the number of empty
(or almost empty) lines, without any loss of readability.  Thus, as the
supply of new-lines on your screen is not a renewable resource (think
25-line terminal screens here), you have more empty lines to put
comments on.

Do not unnecessarily use braces where a single statement will do.

.. code-block:: c

	if (condition)
		action();

and

.. code-block:: c

	if (condition)
		do_this();
	else
		do_that();

This does not apply if only one branch of a conditional statement is a single
statement; in the latter case use braces in both branches:

.. code-block:: c

	if (condition) {
		do_this();
		do_that();
	} else {
		otherwise();
	}

Also, use braces when a loop contains more than a single simple statement:

.. code-block:: c

	while (condition) {
		if (test)
			do_something();
	}

3.1) Spaces
***********

Linux kernel style for use of spaces depends (mostly) on
function-versus-keyword usage.  Use a space after (most) keywords.  The
notable exceptions are sizeof, typeof, alignof, and __attribute__, which look
somewhat like functions (and are usually used with parentheses in Linux,
although they are not required in the language, as in: ``sizeof info`` after
``struct fileinfo info;`` is declared).

So use a space after these keywords::

	if, switch, case, for, do, while

but not with sizeof, typeof, alignof, or __attribute__.  E.g.,

.. code-block:: c


	s = sizeof(struct file);

Do not add spaces around (inside) parenthesized expressions.  This example is
**bad**:

.. code-block:: c


	s = sizeof( struct file );

When declaring pointer data or a function that returns a pointer type, the
preferred use of ``*`` is adjacent to the data name or function name and not
adjacent to the type name.  Examples:

.. code-block:: c


	char *linux_banner;
	unsigned long long memparse(char *ptr, char **retptr);
	char *match_strdup(substring_t *s);

Use one space around (on each side of) most binary and ternary operators,
such as any of these::

	=  +  -  <  >  *  /  %  |  &  ^  <=  >=  ==  !=  ?  :

but no space after unary operators::

	&  *  +  -  ~  !  sizeof  typeof  alignof  __attribute__  defined

no space before the postfix increment & decrement unary operators::

	++  --

no space after the prefix increment & decrement unary operators::

	++  --

and no space around the ``.`` and ``->`` structure member operators.

Do not leave trailing whitespace at the ends of lines.  Some editors with
``smart`` indentation will insert whitespace at the beginning of new lines as
appropriate, so you can start typing the next line of code right away.
However, some such editors do not remove the whitespace if you end up not
putting a line of code there, such as if you leave a blank line.  As a result,
you end up with lines containing trailing whitespace.

Git will warn you about patches that introduce trailing whitespace, and can
optionally strip the trailing whitespace for you; however, if applying a series
of patches, this may make later patches in the series fail by changing their
context lines.


4) Naming
---------

C is a Spartan language, and your naming conventions should follow suit.
Unlike Modula-2 and Pascal programmers, C programmers do not use cute
names like ThisVariableIsATemporaryCounter. A C programmer would call that
variable ``tmp``, which is much easier to write, and not the least more
difficult to understand.

HOWEVER, while mixed-case names are frowned upon, descriptive names for
global variables are a must.  To call a global function ``foo`` is a
shooting offense.

GLOBAL variables (to be used only if you **really** need them) need to
have descriptive names, as do global functions.  If you have a function
that counts the number of active users, you should call that
``count_active_users()`` or similar, you should **not** call it ``cntusr()``.

Encoding the type of a function into the name (so-called Hungarian
notation) is asinine - the compiler knows the types anyway and can check
those, and it only confuses the programmer.

LOCAL variable names should be short, and to the point.  If you have
some random integer loop counter, it should probably be called ``i``.
Calling it ``loop_counter`` is non-productive, if there is no chance of it
being mis-understood.  Similarly, ``tmp`` can be just about any type of
variable that is used to hold a temporary value.

If you are afraid to mix up your local variable names, you have another
problem, which is called the function-growth-hormone-imbalance syndrome.
See chapter 6 (Functions).

For symbol names and documentation, avoid introducing new usage of
'master / slave' (or 'slave' independent of 'master') and 'blacklist /
whitelist'.

Recommended replacements for 'master / slave' are:
    '{primary,main} / {secondary,replica,subordinate}'
    '{initiator,requester} / {target,responder}'
    '{controller,host} / {device,worker,proxy}'
    'leader / follower'
    'director / performer'

Recommended replacements for 'blacklist/whitelist' are:
    'denylist / allowlist'
    'blocklist / passlist'

Exceptions for introducing new usage is to maintain a userspace ABI/API,
or when updating code for an existing (as of 2020) hardware or protocol
specification that mandates those terms. For new specifications
translate specification usage of the terminology to the kernel coding
standard where possible.

5) Typedefs
-----------

Please don't use things like ``vps_t``.
It's a **mistake** to use typedef for structures and pointers. When you see a

.. code-block:: c


	vps_t a;

in the source, what does it mean?
In contrast, if it says

.. code-block:: c

	struct virtual_container *a;

you can actually tell what ``a`` is.

Lots of people think that typedefs ``help readability``. Not so. They are
useful only for:

 (a) totally opaque objects (where the typedef is actively used to **hide**
     what the object is).

     Example: ``pte_t`` etc. opaque objects that you can only access using
     the proper accessor functions.

     .. note::

       Opaqueness and ``accessor functions`` are not good in themselves.
       The reason we have them for things like pte_t etc. is that there
       really is absolutely **zero** portably accessible information there.

 (b) Clear integer types, where the abstraction **helps** avoid confusion
     whether it is ``int`` or ``long``.

     u8/u16/u32 are perfectly fine typedefs, although they fit into
     category (d) better than here.

     .. note::

       Again - there needs to be a **reason** for this. If something is
       ``unsigned long``, then there's no reason to do

	typedef unsigned long myflags_t;

     but if there is a clear reason for why it under certain circumstances
     might be an ``unsigned int`` and under other configurations might be
     ``unsigned long``, then by all means go ahead and use a typedef.

 (c) when you use sparse to literally create a **new** type for
     type-checking.

 (d) New types which are identical to standard C99 types, in certain
     exceptional circumstances.

     Although it would only take a short amount of time for the eyes and
     brain to become accustomed to the standard types like ``uint32_t``,
     some people object to their use anyway.

     Therefore, the Linux-specific ``u8/u16/u32/u64`` types and their
     signed equivalents which are identical to standard types are
     permitted -- although they are not mandatory in new code of your
     own.

     When editing existing code which already uses one or the other set
     of types, you should conform to the existing choices in that code.

 (e) Types safe for use in userspace.

     In certain structures which are visible to userspace, we cannot
     require C99 types and cannot use the ``u32`` form above. Thus, we
     use __u32 and similar types in all structures which are shared
     with userspace.

Maybe there are other cases too, but the rule should basically be to NEVER
EVER use a typedef unless you can clearly match one of those rules.

In general, a pointer, or a struct that has elements that can reasonably
be directly accessed should **never** be a typedef.


6) Functions
------------

Functions should be short and sweet, and do just one thing.  They should
fit on one or two screenfuls of text (the ISO/ANSI screen size is 80x24,
as we all know), and do one thing and do that well.

The maximum length of a function is inversely proportional to the
complexity and indentation level of that function.  So, if you have a
conceptually simple function that is just one long (but simple)
case-statement, where you have to do lots of small things for a lot of
different cases, it's OK to have a longer function.

However, if you have a complex function, and you suspect that a
less-than-gifted first-year high-school student might not even
understand what the function is all about, you should adhere to the
maximum limits all the more closely.  Use helper functions with
descriptive names (you can ask the compiler to in-line them if you think
it's performance-critical, and it will probably do a better job of it
than you would have done).

Another measure of the function is the number of local variables.  They
shouldn't exceed 5-10, or you're doing something wrong.  Re-think the
function, and split it into smaller pieces.  A human brain can
generally easily keep track of about 7 different things, anything more
and it gets confused.  You know you're brilliant, but maybe you'd like
to understand what you did 2 weeks from now.

In source files, separate functions with one blank line.  If the function is
exported, the **EXPORT** macro for it should follow immediately after the
closing function brace line.  E.g.:

.. code-block:: c

	int system_is_up(void)
	{
		return system_state == SYSTEM_RUNNING;
	}
	EXPORT_SYMBOL(system_is_up);

6.1) Function prototypes
************************

In function prototypes, include parameter names with their data types.
Although this is not required by the C language, it is preferred in Linux
because it is a simple way to add valuable information for the reader.

Do not use the ``extern`` keyword with function declarations as this makes
lines longer and isn't strictly necessary.

When writing function prototypes, please keep the `order of elements regular
<https://lore.kernel.org/mm-commits/CAHk-=wiOCLRny5aifWNhr621kYrJwhfURsa0vFPeUEm8mF0ufg@mail.gmail.com/>`_.
For example, using this function declaration example::

 __init void * __must_check action(enum magic value, size_t size, u8 count,
				   char *fmt, ...) __printf(4, 5) __malloc;

The preferred order of elements for a function prototype is:

- storage class (below, ``static __always_inline``, noting that ``__always_inline``
  is technically an attribute but is treated like ``inline``)
- storage class attributes (here, ``__init`` -- i.e. section declarations, but also
  things like ``__cold``)
- return type (here, ``void *``)
- return type attributes (here, ``__must_check``)
- function name (here, ``action``)
- function parameters (here, ``(enum magic value, size_t size, u8 count, char *fmt, ...)``,
  noting that parameter names should always be included)
- function parameter attributes (here, ``__printf(4, 5)``)
- function behavior attributes (here, ``__malloc``)

Note that for a function **definition** (i.e. the actual function body),
the compiler does not allow function parameter attributes after the
function parameters. In these cases, they should go after the storage
class attributes (e.g. note the changed position of ``__printf(4, 5)``
below, compared to the **declaration** example above)::

 static __always_inline __init __printf(4, 5) void * __must_check action(enum magic value,
		size_t size, u8 count, char *fmt, ...) __malloc
 {
	...
 }

7) Centralized exiting of functions
-----------------------------------

Albeit deprecated by some people, the equivalent of the goto statement is
used frequently by compilers in form of the unconditional jump instruction.

The goto statement comes in handy when a function exits from multiple
locations and some common work such as cleanup has to be done.  If there is no
cleanup needed then just return directly.

Choose label names which say what the goto does or why the goto exists.  An
example of a good name could be ``out_free_buffer:`` if the goto frees ``buffer``.
Avoid using GW-BASIC names like ``err1:`` and ``err2:``, as you would have to
renumber them if you ever add or remove exit paths, and they make correctness
difficult to verify anyway.

The rationale for using gotos is:

- unconditional statements are easier to understand and follow
- nesting is reduced
- errors by not updating individual exit points when making
  modifications are prevented
- saves the compiler work to optimize redundant code away ;)

.. code-block:: c

	int fun(int a)
	{
		int result = 0;
		char *buffer;

		buffer = kmalloc(SIZE, GFP_KERNEL);
		if (!buffer)
			return -ENOMEM;

		if (condition1) {
			while (loop1) {
				...
			}
			result = 1;
			goto out_free_buffer;
		}
		...
	out_free_buffer:
		kfree(buffer);
		return result;
	}

A common type of bug to be aware of is ``one err bugs`` which look like this:

.. code-block:: c

	err:
		kfree(foo->bar);
		kfree(foo);
		return ret;

The bug in this code is that on some exit paths ``foo`` is NULL.  Normally the
fix for this is to split it up into two error labels ``err_free_bar:`` and
``err_free_foo:``:

.. code-block:: c

	err_free_bar:
		kfree(foo->bar);
	err_free_foo:
		kfree(foo);
		return ret;

Ideally you should simulate errors to test all exit paths.


8) Commenting
-------------

Comments are good, but there is also a danger of over-commenting.  NEVER
try to explain HOW your code works in a comment: it's much better to
write the code so that the **working** is obvious, and it's a waste of
time to explain badly written code.

Generally, you want your comments to tell WHAT your code does, not HOW.
Also, try to avoid putting comments inside a function body: if the
function is so complex that you need to separately comment parts of it,
you should probably go back to chapter 6 for a while.  You can make
small comments to note or warn about something particularly clever (or
ugly), but try to avoid excess.  Instead, put the comments at the head
of the function, telling people what it does, and possibly WHY it does
it.

When commenting the kernel API functions, please use the kernel-doc format.
See the files at :ref:`Documentation/doc-guide/ <doc_guide>` and
``scripts/kernel-doc`` for details.

The preferred style for long (multi-line) comments is:

.. code-block:: c

	/*
	 * This is the preferred style for multi-line
	 * comments in the Linux kernel source code.
	 * Please use it consistently.
	 *
	 * Description:  A column of asterisks on the left side,
	 * with beginning and ending almost-blank lines.
	 */

It's also important to comment data, whether they are basic types or derived
types.  To this end, use just one data declaration per line (no commas for
multiple data declarations).  This leaves you room for a small comment on each
item, explaining its use.


9) You've made a mess of it
---------------------------

That's OK, we all do.  You've probably been told by your long-time Unix
user helper that ``GNU emacs`` automatically formats the C sources for
you, and you've noticed that yes, it does do that, but the defaults it
uses are less than desirable (in fact, they are worse than random
typing - an infinite number of monkeys typing into GNU emacs would never
make a good program).

So, you can either get rid of GNU emacs, or change it to use saner
values.  To do the latter, you can stick the following in your .emacs file:

.. code-block:: elisp

  (defun c-lineup-arglist-tabs-only (ignored)
    "Line up argument lists by tabs, not spaces"
    (let* ((anchor (c-langelem-pos c-syntactic-element))
           (column (c-langelem-2nd-pos c-syntactic-element))
           (offset (- (1+ column) anchor))
           (steps (floor offset c-basic-offset)))
      (* (max steps 1)
         c-basic-offset)))

  (dir-locals-set-class-variables
   'linux-kernel
   '((c-mode . (
          (c-basic-offset . 8)
          (c-label-minimum-indentation . 0)
          (c-offsets-alist . (
                  (arglist-close         . c-lineup-arglist-tabs-only)
                  (arglist-cont-nonempty .
                      (c-lineup-gcc-asm-reg c-lineup-arglist-tabs-only))
                  (arglist-intro         . +)
                  (brace-list-intro      . +)
                  (c                     . c-lineup-C-comments)
                  (case-label            . 0)
                  (comment-intro         . c-lineup-comment)
                  (cpp-define-intro      . +)
                  (cpp-macro             . -1000)
                  (cpp-macro-cont        . +)
                  (defun-block-intro     . +)
                  (else-clause           . 0)
                  (func-decl-cont        . +)
                  (inclass               . +)
                  (inher-cont            . c-lineup-multi-inher)
                  (knr-argdecl-intro     . 0)
                  (label                 . -1000)
                  (statement             . 0)
                  (statement-block-intro . +)
                  (statement-case-intro  . +)
                  (statement-cont        . +)
                  (substatement          . +)
                  ))
          (indent-tabs-mode . t)
          (show-trailing-whitespace . t)
          ))))

  (dir-locals-set-directory-class
   (expand-file-name "~/src/linux-trees")
   'linux-kernel)

This will make emacs go better with the kernel coding style for C
files below ``~/src/linux-trees``.

But even if you fail in getting emacs to do sane formatting, not
everything is lost: use ``indent``.

Now, again, GNU indent has the same brain-dead settings that GNU emacs
has, which is why you need to give it a few command line options.
However, that's not too bad, because even the makers of GNU indent
recognize the authority of K&R (the GNU people aren't evil, they are
just severely misguided in this matter), so you just give indent the
options ``-kr -i8`` (stands for ``K&R, 8 character indents``), or use
``scripts/Lindent``, which indents in the latest style.

``indent`` has a lot of options, and especially when it comes to comment
re-formatting you may want to take a look at the man page.  But
remember: ``indent`` is not a fix for bad programming.

Note that you can also use the ``clang-format`` tool to help you with
these rules, to quickly re-format parts of your code automatically,
and to review full files in order to spot coding style mistakes,
typos and possible improvements. It is also handy for sorting ``#includes``,
for aligning variables/macros, for reflowing text and other similar tasks.
See the file :ref:`Documentation/dev-tools/clang-format.rst <clangformat>`
for more details.

Some basic editor settings, such as indentation and line endings, will be
set automatically if you are using an editor that is compatible with
EditorConfig. See the official EditorConfig website for more information:
https://editorconfig.org/

10) Kconfig configuration files
-------------------------------

For all of the Kconfig* configuration files throughout the source tree,
the indentation is somewhat different.  Lines under a ``config`` definition
are indented with one tab, while help text is indented an additional two
spaces.  Example::

  config AUDIT
	bool "Auditing support"
	depends on NET
	help
	  Enable auditing infrastructure that can be used with another
	  kernel subsystem, such as SELinux (which requires this for
	  logging of avc messages output).  Does not do system-call
	  auditing without CONFIG_AUDITSYSCALL.

Seriously dangerous features (such as write support for certain
filesystems) should advertise this prominently in their prompt string::

  config ADFS_FS_RW
	bool "ADFS write support (DANGEROUS)"
	depends on ADFS_FS
	...

For full documentation on the configuration files, see the file
Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.rst.


11) Data structures
-------------------

Data structures that have visibility outside the single-threaded
environment they are created and destroyed in should always have
reference counts.  In the kernel, garbage collection doesn't exist (and
outside the kernel garbage collection is slow and inefficient), which
means that you absolutely **have** to reference count all your uses.

Reference counting means that you can avoid locking, and allows multiple
users to have access to the data structure in parallel - and not having
to worry about the structure suddenly going away from under them just
because they slept or did something else for a while.

Note that locking is **not** a replacement for reference counting.
Locking is used to keep data structures coherent, while reference
counting is a memory management technique.  Usually both are needed, and
they are not to be confused with each other.

Many data structures can indeed have two levels of reference counting,
when there are users of different ``classes``.  The subclass count counts
the number of subclass users, and decrements the global count just once
when the subclass count goes to zero.

Examples of this kind of ``multi-level-reference-counting`` can be found in
memory management (``struct mm_struct``: mm_users and mm_count), and in
filesystem code (``struct super_block``: s_count and s_active).

Remember: if another thread can find your data structure, and you don't
have a reference count on it, you almost certainly have a bug.


12) Macros, Enums and RTL
-------------------------

Names of macros defining constants and labels in enums are capitalized.

.. code-block:: c

	#define CONSTANT 0x12345

Enums are preferred when defining several related constants.

CAPITALIZED macro names are appreciated but macros resembling functions
may be named in lower case.

Generally, inline functions are preferable to macros resembling functions.

Macros with multiple statements should be enclosed in a do - while block:

.. code-block:: c

	#define macrofun(a, b, c)			\
		do {					\
			if (a == 5)			\
				do_this(b, c);		\
		} while (0)

Function-like macros with unused parameters should be replaced by static
inline functions to avoid the issue of unused variables:

.. code-block:: c

	static inline void fun(struct foo *foo)
	{
	}

Due to historical practices, many files still employ the "cast to (void)"
approach to evaluate parameters. However, this method is not advisable.
Inline functions address the issue of "expression with side effects
evaluated more than once", circumvent unused-variable problems, and
are generally better documented than macros for some reason.

.. code-block:: c

	/*
	 * Avoid doing this whenever possible and instead opt for static
	 * inline functions
	 */
	#define macrofun(foo) do { (void) (foo); } while (0)

Things to avoid when using macros:

1) macros that affect control flow:

.. code-block:: c

	#define FOO(x)					\
		do {					\
			if (blah(x) < 0)		\
				return -EBUGGERED;	\
		} while (0)

is a **very** bad idea.  It looks like a function call but exits the ``calling``
function; don't break the internal parsers of those who will read the code.

2) macros that depend on having a local variable with a magic name:

.. code-block:: c

	#define FOO(val) bar(index, val)

might look like a good thing, but it's confusing as hell when one reads the
code and it's prone to breakage from seemingly innocent changes.

3) macros with arguments that are used as l-values: FOO(x) = y; will
bite you if somebody e.g. turns FOO into an inline function.

4) forgetting about precedence: macros defining constants using expressions
must enclose the expression in parentheses. Beware of similar issues with
macros using parameters.

.. code-block:: c

	#define CONSTANT 0x4000
	#define CONSTEXP (CONSTANT | 3)

5) namespace collisions when defining local variables in macros resembling
functions:

.. code-block:: c

	#define FOO(x)				\
	({					\
		typeof(x) ret;			\
		ret = calc_ret(x);		\
		(ret);				\
	})

ret is a common name for a local variable - __foo_ret is less likely
to collide with an existing variable.

The cpp manual deals with macros exhaustively. The gcc internals manual also
covers RTL which is used frequently with assembly language in the kernel.


13) Printing kernel messages
----------------------------

Kernel developers like to be seen as literate. Do mind the spelling
of kernel messages to make a good impression. Do not use incorrect
contractions like ``dont``; use ``do not`` or ``don't`` instead. Make the
messages concise, clear, and unambiguous.

Kernel messages do not have to be terminated with a period.

Printing numbers in parentheses (%d) adds no value and should be avoided.

There are a number of driver model diagnostic macros in <linux/dev_printk.h>
which you should use to make sure messages are matched to the right device
and driver, and are tagged with the right level:  dev_err(), dev_warn(),
dev_info(), and so forth.  For messages that aren't associated with a
particular device, <linux/printk.h> defines pr_notice(), pr_info(),
pr_warn(), pr_err(), etc. When drivers are working properly they are quiet,
so prefer to use dev_dbg/pr_debug unless something is wrong.

Coming up with good debugging messages can be quite a challenge; and once
you have them, they can be a huge help for remote troubleshooting.  However
debug message printing is handled differently than printing other non-debug
messages.  While the other pr_XXX() functions print unconditionally,
pr_debug() does not; it is compiled out by default, unless either DEBUG is
defined or CONFIG_DYNAMIC_DEBUG is set.  That is true for dev_dbg() also,
and a related convention uses VERBOSE_DEBUG to add dev_vdbg() messages to
the ones already enabled by DEBUG.

Many subsystems have Kconfig debug options to turn on -DDEBUG in the
corresponding Makefile; in other cases specific files #define DEBUG.  And
when a debug message should be unconditionally printed, such as if it is
already inside a debug-related #ifdef section, printk(KERN_DEBUG ...) can be
used.


14) Allocating memory
---------------------

The kernel provides the following general purpose memory allocators:
kmalloc(), kzalloc(), kmalloc_array(), kcalloc(), vmalloc(), and
vzalloc().  Please refer to the API documentation for further information
about them.  :ref:`Documentation/core-api/memory-allocation.rst
<memory_allocation>`

The preferred form for passing a size of a struct is the following:

.. code-block:: c

	p = kmalloc(sizeof(*p), ...);

The alternative form where struct name is spelled out hurts readability and
introduces an opportunity for a bug when the pointer variable type is changed
but the corresponding sizeof that is passed to a memory allocator is not.

Casting the return value which is a void pointer is redundant. The conversion
from void pointer to any other pointer type is guaranteed by the C programming
language.

The preferred form for allocating an array is the following:

.. code-block:: c

	p = kmalloc_array(n, sizeof(...), ...);

The preferred form for allocating a zeroed array is the following:

.. code-block:: c

	p = kcalloc(n, sizeof(...), ...);

Both forms check for overflow on the allocation size n * sizeof(...),
and return NULL if that occurred.

These generic allocation functions all emit a stack dump on failure when used
without __GFP_NOWARN so there is no use in emitting an additional failure
message when NULL is returned.

15) The inline disease
----------------------

There appears to be a common misperception that gcc has a magic "make me
faster" speedup option called ``inline``. While the use of inlines can be
appropriate (for example as a means of replacing macros, see Chapter 12), it
very often is not. Abundant use of the inline keyword leads to a much bigger
kernel, which in turn slows the system as a whole down, due to a bigger
icache footprint for the CPU and simply because there is less memory
available for the pagecache. Just think about it; a pagecache miss causes a
disk seek, which easily takes 5 milliseconds. There are a LOT of cpu cycles
that can go into these 5 milliseconds.

A reasonable rule of thumb is to not put inline at functions that have more
than 3 lines of code in them. An exception to this rule are the cases where
a parameter is known to be a compile time constant, and as a result of this
constantness you *know* the compiler will be able to optimize most of your
function away at compile time. For a good example of this later case, see
the kmalloc() inline function.

Often people argue that adding inline to functions that are static and used
only once is always a win since there is no space tradeoff. While this is
technically correct, gcc is capable of inlining these automatically without
help, and the maintenance issue of removing the inline when a second user
appears outweighs the potential value of the hint that tells gcc to do
something it would have done anyway.


16) Function return values and names
------------------------------------

Functions can return values of many different kinds, and one of the
most common is a value indicating whether the function succeeded or
failed.  Such a value can be represented as an error-code integer
(-Exxx = failure, 0 = success) or a ``succeeded`` boolean (0 = failure,
non-zero = success).

Mixing up these two sorts of representations is a fertile source of
difficult-to-find bugs.  If the C language included a strong distinction
between integers and booleans then the compiler would find these mistakes
for us... but it doesn't.  To help prevent such bugs, always follow this
convention::

	If the name of a function is an action or an imperative command,
	the function should return an error-code integer.  If the name
	is a predicate, the function should return a "succeeded" boolean.

For example, ``add work`` is a command, and the add_work() function returns 0
for success or -EBUSY for failure.  In the same way, ``PCI device present`` is
a predicate, and the pci_dev_present() function returns 1 if it succeeds in
finding a matching device or 0 if it doesn't.

All EXPORTed functions must respect this convention, and so should all
public functions.  Private (static) functions need not, but it is
recommended that they do.

Functions whose return value is the actual result of a computation, rather
than an indication of whether the computation succeeded, are not subject to
this rule.  Generally they indicate failure by returning some out-of-range
result.  Typical examples would be functions that return pointers; they use
NULL or the ERR_PTR mechanism to report failure.


17) Using bool
--------------

The Linux kernel bool type is an alias for the C99 _Bool type. bool values can
only evaluate to 0 or 1, and implicit or explicit conversion to bool
automatically converts the value to true or false. When using bool types the
!! construction is not needed, which eliminates a class of bugs.

When working with bool values the true and false definitions should be used
instead of 1 and 0.

bool function return types and stack variables are always fine to use whenever
appropriate. Use of bool is encouraged to improve readability and is often a
better option than 'int' for storing boolean values.

Do not use bool if cache line layout or size of the value matters, as its size
and alignment varies based on the compiled architecture. Structures that are
optimized for alignment and size should not use bool.

If a structure has many true/false values, consider consolidating them into a
bitfield with 1 bit members, or using an appropriate fixed width type, such as
u8.

Similarly for function arguments, many true/false values can be consolidated
into a single bitwise 'flags' argument and 'flags' can often be a more
readable alternative if the call-sites have naked true/false constants.

Otherwise limited use of bool in structures and arguments can improve
readability.

18) Don't re-invent the kernel macros
-------------------------------------

The header file include/linux/kernel.h contains a number of macros that
you should use, rather than explicitly coding some variant of them yourself.
For example, if you need to calculate the length of an array, take advantage
of the macro

.. code-block:: c

	#define ARRAY_SIZE(x) (sizeof(x) / sizeof((x)[0]))

Similarly, if you need to calculate the size of some structure member, use

.. code-block:: c

	#define sizeof_field(t, f) (sizeof(((t*)0)->f))

There are also min() and max() macros that do strict type checking if you
need them.  Feel free to peruse that header file to see what else is already
defined that you shouldn't reproduce in your code.


19) Editor modelines and other cruft
------------------------------------

Some editors can interpret configuration information embedded in source files,
indicated with special markers.  For example, emacs interprets lines marked
like this:

.. code-block:: c

	-*- mode: c -*-

Or like this:

.. code-block:: c

	/*
	Local Variables:
	compile-command: "gcc -DMAGIC_DEBUG_FLAG foo.c"
	End:
	*/

Vim interprets markers that look like this:

.. code-block:: c

	/* vim:set sw=8 noet */

Do not include any of these in source files.  People have their own personal
editor configurations, and your source files should not override them.  This
includes markers for indentation and mode configuration.  People may use their
own custom mode, or may have some other magic method for making indentation
work correctly.


20) Inline assembly
-------------------

In architecture-specific code, you may need to use inline assembly to interface
with CPU or platform functionality.  Don't hesitate to do so when necessary.
However, don't use inline assembly gratuitously when C can do the job.  You can
and should poke hardware from C when possible.

Consider writing simple helper functions that wrap common bits of inline
assembly, rather than repeatedly writing them with slight variations.  Remember
that inline assembly can use C parameters.

Large, non-trivial assembly functions should go in .S files, with corresponding
C prototypes defined in C header files.  The C prototypes for assembly
functions should use ``asmlinkage``.

You may need to mark your asm statement as volatile, to prevent GCC from
removing it if GCC doesn't notice any side effects.  You don't always need to
do so, though, and doing so unnecessarily can limit optimization.

When writing a single inline assembly statement containing multiple
instructions, put each instruction on a separate line in a separate quoted
string, and end each string except the last with ``\n\t`` to properly indent
the next instruction in the assembly output:

.. code-block:: c

	asm ("magic %reg1, #42\n\t"
	     "more_magic %reg2, %reg3"
	     : /* outputs */ : /* inputs */ : /* clobbers */);


21) Conditional Compilation
---------------------------

Wherever possible, don't use preprocessor conditionals (#if, #ifdef) in .c
files; doing so makes code harder to read and logic harder to follow.  Instead,
use such conditionals in a header file defining functions for use in those .c
files, providing no-op stub versions in the #else case, and then call those
functions unconditionally from .c files.  The compiler will avoid generating
any code for the stub calls, producing identical results, but the logic will
remain easy to follow.

Prefer to compile out entire functions, rather than portions of functions or
portions of expressions.  Rather than putting an ifdef in an expression, factor
out part or all of the expression into a separate helper function and apply the
conditional to that function.

If you have a function or variable which may potentially go unused in a
particular configuration, and the compiler would warn about its definition
going unused, mark the definition as __maybe_unused rather than wrapping it in
a preprocessor conditional.  (However, if a function or variable *always* goes
unused, delete it.)

Within code, where possible, use the IS_ENABLED macro to convert a Kconfig
symbol into a C boolean expression, and use it in a normal C conditional:

.. code-block:: c

	if (IS_ENABLED(CONFIG_SOMETHING)) {
		...
	}

The compiler will constant-fold the conditional away, and include or exclude
the block of code just as with an #ifdef, so this will not add any runtime
overhead.  However, this approach still allows the C compiler to see the code
inside the block, and check it for correctness (syntax, types, symbol
references, etc).  Thus, you still have to use an #ifdef if the code inside the
block references symbols that will not exist if the condition is not met.

At the end of any non-trivial #if or #ifdef block (more than a few lines),
place a comment after the #endif on the same line, noting the conditional
expression used.  For instance:

.. code-block:: c

	#ifdef CONFIG_SOMETHING
	...
	#endif /* CONFIG_SOMETHING */


22) Do not crash the kernel
---------------------------

In general, the decision to crash the kernel belongs to the user, rather
than to the kernel developer.

Avoid panic()
*************

panic() should be used with care and primarily only during system boot.
panic() is, for example, acceptable when running out of memory during boot and
not being able to continue.

Use WARN() rather than BUG()
****************************

Do not add new code that uses any of the BUG() variants, such as BUG(),
BUG_ON(), or VM_BUG_ON(). Instead, use a WARN*() variant, preferably
WARN_ON_ONCE(), and possibly with recovery code. Recovery code is not
required if there is no reasonable way to at least partially recover.

"I'm too lazy to do error handling" is not an excuse for using BUG(). Major
internal corruptions with no way of continuing may still use BUG(), but need
good justification.

Use WARN_ON_ONCE() rather than WARN() or WARN_ON()
**************************************************

WARN_ON_ONCE() is generally preferred over WARN() or WARN_ON(), because it
is common for a given warning condition, if it occurs at all, to occur
multiple times. This can fill up and wrap the kernel log, and can even slow
the system enough that the excessive logging turns into its own, additional
problem.

Do not WARN lightly
*******************

WARN*() is intended for unexpected, this-should-never-happen situations.
WARN*() macros are not to be used for anything that is expected to happen
during normal operation. These are not pre- or post-condition asserts, for
example. Again: WARN*() must not be used for a condition that is expected
to trigger easily, for example, by user space actions. pr_warn_once() is a
possible alternative, if you need to notify the user of a problem.

Do not worry about panic_on_warn users
**************************************

A few more words about panic_on_warn: Remember that ``panic_on_warn`` is an
available kernel option, and that many users set this option. This is why
there is a "Do not WARN lightly" writeup, above. However, the existence of
panic_on_warn users is not a valid reason to avoid the judicious use
WARN*(). That is because, whoever enables panic_on_warn has explicitly
asked the kernel to crash if a WARN*() fires, and such users must be
prepared to deal with the consequences of a system that is somewhat more
likely to crash.

Use BUILD_BUG_ON() for compile-time assertions
**********************************************

The use of BUILD_BUG_ON() is acceptable and encouraged, because it is a
compile-time assertion that has no effect at runtime.

Appendix I) References
----------------------

The C Programming Language, Second Edition
by Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie.
Prentice Hall, Inc., 1988.
ISBN 0-13-110362-8 (paperback), 0-13-110370-9 (hardback).

The Practice of Programming
by Brian W. Kernighan and Rob Pike.
Addison-Wesley, Inc., 1999.
ISBN 0-201-61586-X.

GNU manuals - where in compliance with K&R and this text - for cpp, gcc,
gcc internals and indent, all available from https://www.gnu.org/manual/

WG14 is the international standardization working group for the programming
language C, URL: http://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG14/

Kernel CodingStyle, by greg@kroah.com at OLS 2002:
http://www.kroah.com/linux/talks/ols_2002_kernel_codingstyle_talk/html/
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

========================================
Linux Kernel Contribution Maturity Model
========================================


Background
==========

As a part of the 2021 Linux Kernel Maintainers’ Summit, there was a
`discussion <https://lwn.net/Articles/870581/>`_ about the challenges in
recruiting kernel maintainers as well as maintainer succession.  Some of
the conclusions from that discussion included that companies which are a
part of the Linux Kernel community need to allow engineers to be
maintainers as part of their job, so they can grow into becoming
respected leaders and eventually, kernel maintainers.  To support a
strong talent pipeline, developers should be allowed and encouraged to
take on upstream contributions such as reviewing other people’s patches,
refactoring kernel infrastructure, and writing documentation.

To that end, the Linux Foundation Technical Advisory Board (TAB)
proposes this Linux Kernel Contribution Maturity Model. These common
expectations for upstream community engagement aim to increase the
influence of individual developers, increase the collaboration of
organizations, and improve the overall health of the Linux Kernel
ecosystem.

The TAB urges organizations to continuously evaluate their Open Source
maturity model and commit to improvements to align with this model.  To
be effective, this evaluation should incorporate feedback from across
the organization, including management and developers at all seniority
levels.  In the spirit of Open Source, we encourage organizations to
publish their evaluations and plans to improve their engagement with the
upstream community.

Level 0
=======

* Software Engineers are not allowed to contribute patches to the Linux
  kernel.


Level 1
=======

* Software Engineers are allowed to contribute patches to the Linux
  kernel, either as part of their job responsibilities or on their own
  time.

Level 2
=======

* Software Engineers are expected to contribute to the Linux Kernel as
  part of their job responsibilities.
* Software Engineers will be supported to attend Linux-related
  conferences as a part of their job.
* A Software Engineer’s upstream code contributions will be considered
  in promotion and performance reviews.

Level 3
=======

* Software Engineers are expected to review patches (including patches
  authored by engineers from other companies) as part of their job
  responsibilities
* Contributing presentations or papers to Linux-related or academic
  conferences (such those organized by the Linux Foundation, Usenix,
  ACM, etc.), are considered part of an engineer’s work.
* A Software Engineer’s community contributions will be considered in
  promotion and performance reviews.
* Organizations will regularly report metrics of their open source
  contributions and track these metrics over time.  These metrics may be
  published only internally within the organization, or at the
  organization’s discretion, some or all may be published externally.
  Metrics that are strongly suggested include:

  * The number of upstream kernel contributions by team or organization
    (e.g., all people reporting up to a manager, director, or VP).
  * The percentage of kernel developers who have made upstream
    contributions relative to the total kernel developers in the
    organization.
  * The time interval between kernels used in the organization’s servers
    and/or products, and the publication date of the upstream kernel
    upon which the internal kernel is based.
  * The number of out-of-tree commits present in internal kernels.

Level 4
=======

* Software Engineers are encouraged to spend a portion of their work
  time focused on Upstream Work, which is defined as reviewing patches,
  serving on program committees, improving core project infrastructure
  such as writing or maintaining tests, upstream tech debt reduction,
  writing documentation, etc.
* Software Engineers are supported in helping to organize Linux-related
  conferences.
* Organizations will consider community member feedback in official
  performance reviews.

Level 5
=======

* Upstream kernel development is considered a formal job position, with
  at least a third of the engineer’s time spent doing Upstream Work.
* Organizations will actively seek out community member feedback as a
  factor in official performance reviews.
* Organizations will regularly report internally on the ratio of
  Upstream Work to work focused on directly pursuing business goals.
====
CVEs
====

Common Vulnerabilities and Exposure (CVE®) numbers were developed as an
unambiguous way to identify, define, and catalog publicly disclosed
security vulnerabilities.  Over time, their usefulness has declined with
regards to the kernel project, and CVE numbers were very often assigned
in inappropriate ways and for inappropriate reasons.  Because of this,
the kernel development community has tended to avoid them.  However, the
combination of continuing pressure to assign CVEs and other forms of
security identifiers, and ongoing abuses by individuals and companies
outside of the kernel community has made it clear that the kernel
community should have control over those assignments.

The Linux kernel developer team does have the ability to assign CVEs for
potential Linux kernel security issues.  This assignment is independent
of the :doc:`normal Linux kernel security bug reporting
process<../process/security-bugs>`.

A list of all assigned CVEs for the Linux kernel can be found in the
archives of the linux-cve mailing list, as seen on
https://lore.kernel.org/linux-cve-announce/.  To get notice of the
assigned CVEs, please `subscribe
<https://subspace.kernel.org/subscribing.html>`_ to that mailing list.

Process
=======

As part of the normal stable release process, kernel changes that are
potentially security issues are identified by the developers responsible
for CVE number assignments and have CVE numbers automatically assigned
to them.  These assignments are published on the linux-cve-announce
mailing list as announcements on a frequent basis.

Note, due to the layer at which the Linux kernel is in a system, almost
any bug might be exploitable to compromise the security of the kernel,
but the possibility of exploitation is often not evident when the bug is
fixed.  Because of this, the CVE assignment team is overly cautious and
assign CVE numbers to any bugfix that they identify.  This
explains the seemingly large number of CVEs that are issued by the Linux
kernel team.

If the CVE assignment team misses a specific fix that any user feels
should have a CVE assigned to it, please email them at <cve@kernel.org>
and the team there will work with you on it.  Note that no potential
security issues should be sent to this alias, it is ONLY for assignment
of CVEs for fixes that are already in released kernel trees.  If you
feel you have found an unfixed security issue, please follow the
:doc:`normal Linux kernel security bug reporting
process<../process/security-bugs>`.

No CVEs will be automatically assigned for unfixed security issues in
the Linux kernel; assignment will only automatically happen after a fix
is available and applied to a stable kernel tree, and it will be tracked
that way by the git commit id of the original fix.  If anyone wishes to
have a CVE assigned before an issue is resolved with a commit, please
contact the kernel CVE assignment team at <cve@kernel.org> to get an
identifier assigned from their batch of reserved identifiers.

No CVEs will be assigned for any issue found in a version of the kernel
that is not currently being actively supported by the Stable/LTS kernel
team.  A list of the currently supported kernel branches can be found at
https://kernel.org/releases.html

Disputes of assigned CVEs
=========================

The authority to dispute or modify an assigned CVE for a specific kernel
change lies solely with the maintainers of the relevant subsystem
affected.  This principle ensures a high degree of accuracy and
accountability in vulnerability reporting.  Only those individuals with
deep expertise and intimate knowledge of the subsystem can effectively
assess the validity and scope of a reported vulnerability and determine
its appropriate CVE designation.  Any attempt to modify or dispute a CVE
outside of this designated authority could lead to confusion, inaccurate
reporting, and ultimately, compromised systems.

Invalid CVEs
============

If a security issue is found in a Linux kernel that is only supported by
a Linux distribution due to the changes that have been made by that
distribution, or due to the distribution supporting a kernel version
that is no longer one of the kernel.org supported releases, then a CVE
can not be assigned by the Linux kernel CVE team, and must be asked for
from that Linux distribution itself.

Any CVE that is assigned against the Linux kernel for an actively
supported kernel version, by any group other than the kernel assignment
CVE team should not be treated as a valid CVE.  Please notify the
kernel CVE assignment team at <cve@kernel.org> so that they can work to
invalidate such entries through the CNA remediation process.

Applicability of specific CVEs
==============================

As the Linux kernel can be used in many different ways, with many
different ways of accessing it by external users, or no access at all,
the applicability of any specific CVE is up to the user of Linux to
determine, it is not up to the CVE assignment team.  Please do not
contact us to attempt to determine the applicability of any specific
CVE.

Also, as the source tree is so large, and any one system only uses a
small subset of the source tree, any users of Linux should be aware that
large numbers of assigned CVEs are not relevant for their systems.

In short, we do not know your use case, and we do not know what portions
of the kernel that you use, so there is no way for us to determine if a
specific CVE is relevant for your system.

As always, it is best to take all released kernel changes, as they are
tested together in a unified whole by many community members, and not as
individual cherry-picked changes.  Also note that for many bugs, the
solution to the overall problem is not found in a single change, but by
the sum of many fixes on top of each other.  Ideally CVEs will be
assigned to all fixes for all issues, but sometimes we will fail to
notice fixes, therefore assume that some changes without a CVE assigned
might be relevant to take.

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

.. _deprecated:

=====================================================================
Deprecated Interfaces, Language Features, Attributes, and Conventions
=====================================================================

In a perfect world, it would be possible to convert all instances of
some deprecated API into the new API and entirely remove the old API in
a single development cycle. However, due to the size of the kernel, the
maintainership hierarchy, and timing, it's not always feasible to do these
kinds of conversions at once. This means that new instances may sneak into
the kernel while old ones are being removed, only making the amount of
work to remove the API grow. In order to educate developers about what
has been deprecated and why, this list has been created as a place to
point when uses of deprecated things are proposed for inclusion in the
kernel.

__deprecated
------------
While this attribute does visually mark an interface as deprecated,
it `does not produce warnings during builds any more
<https://git.kernel.org/linus/771c035372a036f83353eef46dbb829780330234>`_
because one of the standing goals of the kernel is to build without
warnings and no one was actually doing anything to remove these deprecated
interfaces. While using `__deprecated` is nice to note an old API in
a header file, it isn't the full solution. Such interfaces must either
be fully removed from the kernel, or added to this file to discourage
others from using them in the future.

BUG() and BUG_ON()
------------------
Use WARN() and WARN_ON() instead, and handle the "impossible"
error condition as gracefully as possible. While the BUG()-family
of APIs were originally designed to act as an "impossible situation"
assert and to kill a kernel thread "safely", they turn out to just be
too risky. (e.g. "In what order do locks need to be released? Have
various states been restored?") Very commonly, using BUG() will
destabilize a system or entirely break it, which makes it impossible
to debug or even get viable crash reports. Linus has `very strong
<https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/CA+55aFy6jNLsywVYdGp83AMrXBo_P-pkjkphPGrO=82SPKCpLQ@mail.gmail.com/>`_
feelings `about this
<https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/CAHk-=whDHsbK3HTOpTF=ue_o04onRwTEaK_ZoJp_fjbqq4+=Jw@mail.gmail.com/>`_.

Note that the WARN()-family should only be used for "expected to
be unreachable" situations. If you want to warn about "reachable
but undesirable" situations, please use the pr_warn()-family of
functions. System owners may have set the *panic_on_warn* sysctl,
to make sure their systems do not continue running in the face of
"unreachable" conditions. (For example, see commits like `this one
<https://git.kernel.org/linus/d4689846881d160a4d12a514e991a740bcb5d65a>`_.)

open-coded arithmetic in allocator arguments
--------------------------------------------
Dynamic size calculations (especially multiplication) should not be
performed in memory allocator (or similar) function arguments due to the
risk of them overflowing. This could lead to values wrapping around and a
smaller allocation being made than the caller was expecting. Using those
allocations could lead to linear overflows of heap memory and other
misbehaviors. (One exception to this is literal values where the compiler
can warn if they might overflow. However, the preferred way in these
cases is to refactor the code as suggested below to avoid the open-coded
arithmetic.)

For example, do not use ``count * size`` as an argument, as in::

	foo = kmalloc(count * size, GFP_KERNEL);

Instead, the 2-factor form of the allocator should be used::

	foo = kmalloc_array(count, size, GFP_KERNEL);

Specifically, kmalloc() can be replaced with kmalloc_array(), and
kzalloc() can be replaced with kcalloc().

If no 2-factor form is available, the saturate-on-overflow helpers should
be used::

	bar = dma_alloc_coherent(dev, array_size(count, size), &dma, GFP_KERNEL);

Another common case to avoid is calculating the size of a structure with
a trailing array of others structures, as in::

	header = kzalloc(sizeof(*header) + count * sizeof(*header->item),
			 GFP_KERNEL);

Instead, use the helper::

	header = kzalloc(struct_size(header, item, count), GFP_KERNEL);

.. note:: If you are using struct_size() on a structure containing a zero-length
        or a one-element array as a trailing array member, please refactor such
        array usage and switch to a `flexible array member
        <#zero-length-and-one-element-arrays>`_ instead.

For other calculations, please compose the use of the size_mul(),
size_add(), and size_sub() helpers. For example, in the case of::

	foo = krealloc(current_size + chunk_size * (count - 3), GFP_KERNEL);

Instead, use the helpers::

	foo = krealloc(size_add(current_size,
				size_mul(chunk_size,
					 size_sub(count, 3))), GFP_KERNEL);

For more details, also see array3_size() and flex_array_size(),
as well as the related check_mul_overflow(), check_add_overflow(),
check_sub_overflow(), and check_shl_overflow() family of functions.

simple_strtol(), simple_strtoll(), simple_strtoul(), simple_strtoull()
----------------------------------------------------------------------
The simple_strtol(), simple_strtoll(),
simple_strtoul(), and simple_strtoull() functions
explicitly ignore overflows, which may lead to unexpected results
in callers. The respective kstrtol(), kstrtoll(),
kstrtoul(), and kstrtoull() functions tend to be the
correct replacements, though note that those require the string to be
NUL or newline terminated.

strcpy()
--------
strcpy() performs no bounds checking on the destination buffer. This
could result in linear overflows beyond the end of the buffer, leading to
all kinds of misbehaviors. While `CONFIG_FORTIFY_SOURCE=y` and various
compiler flags help reduce the risk of using this function, there is
no good reason to add new uses of this function. The safe replacement
is strscpy(), though care must be given to any cases where the return
value of strcpy() was used, since strscpy() does not return a pointer to
the destination, but rather a count of non-NUL bytes copied (or negative
errno when it truncates).

strncpy() on NUL-terminated strings
-----------------------------------
Use of strncpy() does not guarantee that the destination buffer will
be NUL terminated. This can lead to various linear read overflows and
other misbehavior due to the missing termination. It also NUL-pads
the destination buffer if the source contents are shorter than the
destination buffer size, which may be a needless performance penalty
for callers using only NUL-terminated strings.

When the destination is required to be NUL-terminated, the replacement is
strscpy(), though care must be given to any cases where the return value
of strncpy() was used, since strscpy() does not return a pointer to the
destination, but rather a count of non-NUL bytes copied (or negative
errno when it truncates). Any cases still needing NUL-padding should
instead use strscpy_pad().

If a caller is using non-NUL-terminated strings, strtomem() should be
used, and the destinations should be marked with the `__nonstring
<https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Common-Variable-Attributes.html>`_
attribute to avoid future compiler warnings. For cases still needing
NUL-padding, strtomem_pad() can be used.

strlcpy()
---------
strlcpy() reads the entire source buffer first (since the return value
is meant to match that of strlen()). This read may exceed the destination
size limit. This is both inefficient and can lead to linear read overflows
if a source string is not NUL-terminated. The safe replacement is strscpy(),
though care must be given to any cases where the return value of strlcpy()
is used, since strscpy() will return negative errno values when it truncates.

%p format specifier
-------------------
Traditionally, using "%p" in format strings would lead to regular address
exposure flaws in dmesg, proc, sysfs, etc. Instead of leaving these to
be exploitable, all "%p" uses in the kernel are being printed as a hashed
value, rendering them unusable for addressing. New uses of "%p" should not
be added to the kernel. For text addresses, using "%pS" is likely better,
as it produces the more useful symbol name instead. For nearly everything
else, just do not add "%p" at all.

Paraphrasing Linus's current `guidance <https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/CA+55aFwQEd_d40g4mUCSsVRZzrFPUJt74vc6PPpb675hYNXcKw@mail.gmail.com/>`_:

- If the hashed "%p" value is pointless, ask yourself whether the pointer
  itself is important. Maybe it should be removed entirely?
- If you really think the true pointer value is important, why is some
  system state or user privilege level considered "special"? If you think
  you can justify it (in comments and commit log) well enough to stand
  up to Linus's scrutiny, maybe you can use "%px", along with making sure
  you have sensible permissions.

If you are debugging something where "%p" hashing is causing problems,
you can temporarily boot with the debug flag "`no_hash_pointers
<https://git.kernel.org/linus/5ead723a20e0447bc7db33dc3070b420e5f80aa6>`_".

Variable Length Arrays (VLAs)
-----------------------------
Using stack VLAs produces much worse machine code than statically
sized stack arrays. While these non-trivial `performance issues
<https://git.kernel.org/linus/02361bc77888>`_ are reason enough to
eliminate VLAs, they are also a security risk. Dynamic growth of a stack
array may exceed the remaining memory in the stack segment. This could
lead to a crash, possible overwriting sensitive contents at the end of the
stack (when built without `CONFIG_THREAD_INFO_IN_TASK=y`), or overwriting
memory adjacent to the stack (when built without `CONFIG_VMAP_STACK=y`)

Implicit switch case fall-through
---------------------------------
The C language allows switch cases to fall through to the next case
when a "break" statement is missing at the end of a case. This, however,
introduces ambiguity in the code, as it's not always clear if the missing
break is intentional or a bug. For example, it's not obvious just from
looking at the code if `STATE_ONE` is intentionally designed to fall
through into `STATE_TWO`::

	switch (value) {
	case STATE_ONE:
		do_something();
	case STATE_TWO:
		do_other();
		break;
	default:
		WARN("unknown state");
	}

As there have been a long list of flaws `due to missing "break" statements
<https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/484.html>`_, we no longer allow
implicit fall-through. In order to identify intentional fall-through
cases, we have adopted a pseudo-keyword macro "fallthrough" which
expands to gcc's extension `__attribute__((__fallthrough__))
<https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Statement-Attributes.html>`_.
(When the C17/C18  `[[fallthrough]]` syntax is more commonly supported by
C compilers, static analyzers, and IDEs, we can switch to using that syntax
for the macro pseudo-keyword.)

All switch/case blocks must end in one of:

* break;
* fallthrough;
* continue;
* goto <label>;
* return [expression];

Zero-length and one-element arrays
----------------------------------
There is a regular need in the kernel to provide a way to declare having
a dynamically sized set of trailing elements in a structure. Kernel code
should always use `"flexible array members" <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flexible_array_member>`_
for these cases. The older style of one-element or zero-length arrays should
no longer be used.

In older C code, dynamically sized trailing elements were done by specifying
a one-element array at the end of a structure::

        struct something {
                size_t count;
                struct foo items[1];
        };

This led to fragile size calculations via sizeof() (which would need to
remove the size of the single trailing element to get a correct size of
the "header"). A `GNU C extension <https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Zero-Length.html>`_
was introduced to allow for zero-length arrays, to avoid these kinds of
size problems::

        struct something {
                size_t count;
                struct foo items[0];
        };

But this led to other problems, and didn't solve some problems shared by
both styles, like not being able to detect when such an array is accidentally
being used _not_ at the end of a structure (which could happen directly, or
when such a struct was in unions, structs of structs, etc).

C99 introduced "flexible array members", which lacks a numeric size for
the array declaration entirely::

        struct something {
                size_t count;
                struct foo items[];
        };

This is the way the kernel expects dynamically sized trailing elements
to be declared. It allows the compiler to generate errors when the
flexible array does not occur last in the structure, which helps to prevent
some kind of `undefined behavior
<https://git.kernel.org/linus/76497732932f15e7323dc805e8ea8dc11bb587cf>`_
bugs from being inadvertently introduced to the codebase. It also allows
the compiler to correctly analyze array sizes (via sizeof(),
`CONFIG_FORTIFY_SOURCE`, and `CONFIG_UBSAN_BOUNDS`). For instance,
there is no mechanism that warns us that the following application of the
sizeof() operator to a zero-length array always results in zero::

        struct something {
                size_t count;
                struct foo items[0];
        };

        struct something *instance;

        instance = kmalloc(struct_size(instance, items, count), GFP_KERNEL);
        instance->count = count;

        size = sizeof(instance->items) * instance->count;
        memcpy(instance->items, source, size);

At the last line of code above, ``size`` turns out to be ``zero``, when one might
have thought it represents the total size in bytes of the dynamic memory recently
allocated for the trailing array ``items``. Here are a couple examples of this
issue: `link 1
<https://git.kernel.org/linus/f2cd32a443da694ac4e28fbf4ac6f9d5cc63a539>`_,
`link 2
<https://git.kernel.org/linus/ab91c2a89f86be2898cee208d492816ec238b2cf>`_.
Instead, `flexible array members have incomplete type, and so the sizeof()
operator may not be applied <https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Zero-Length.html>`_,
so any misuse of such operators will be immediately noticed at build time.

With respect to one-element arrays, one has to be acutely aware that `such arrays
occupy at least as much space as a single object of the type
<https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Zero-Length.html>`_,
hence they contribute to the size of the enclosing structure. This is prone
to error every time people want to calculate the total size of dynamic memory
to allocate for a structure containing an array of this kind as a member::

        struct something {
                size_t count;
                struct foo items[1];
        };

        struct something *instance;

        instance = kmalloc(struct_size(instance, items, count - 1), GFP_KERNEL);
        instance->count = count;

        size = sizeof(instance->items) * instance->count;
        memcpy(instance->items, source, size);

In the example above, we had to remember to calculate ``count - 1`` when using
the struct_size() helper, otherwise we would have --unintentionally-- allocated
memory for one too many ``items`` objects. The cleanest and least error-prone way
to implement this is through the use of a `flexible array member`, together with
struct_size() and flex_array_size() helpers::

        struct something {
                size_t count;
                struct foo items[];
        };

        struct something *instance;

        instance = kmalloc(struct_size(instance, items, count), GFP_KERNEL);
        instance->count = count;

        memcpy(instance->items, source, flex_array_size(instance, items, instance->count));

There are two special cases of replacement where the DECLARE_FLEX_ARRAY()
helper needs to be used. (Note that it is named __DECLARE_FLEX_ARRAY() for
use in UAPI headers.) Those cases are when the flexible array is either
alone in a struct or is part of a union. These are disallowed by the C99
specification, but for no technical reason (as can be seen by both the
existing use of such arrays in those places and the work-around that
DECLARE_FLEX_ARRAY() uses). For example, to convert this::

	struct something {
		...
		union {
			struct type1 one[0];
			struct type2 two[0];
		};
	};

The helper must be used::

	struct something {
		...
		union {
			DECLARE_FLEX_ARRAY(struct type1, one);
			DECLARE_FLEX_ARRAY(struct type2, two);
		};
	};
.. _development_process_main:

A guide to the Kernel Development Process
=========================================

The purpose of this document is to help developers (and their managers)
work with the development community with a minimum of frustration.  It is
an attempt to document how this community works in a way which is
accessible to those who are not intimately familiar with Linux kernel
development (or, indeed, free software development in general).  While
there is some technical material here, this is very much a process-oriented
discussion which does not require a deep knowledge of kernel programming to
understand.

.. toctree::
   :caption: Contents
   :numbered:
   :maxdepth: 2

   1.Intro
   2.Process
   3.Early-stage
   4.Coding
   5.Posting
   6.Followthrough
   7.AdvancedTopics
   8.Conclusion
.. _email_clients:

Email clients info for Linux
============================

Git
---

These days most developers use ``git send-email`` instead of regular
email clients.  The man page for this is quite good.  On the receiving
end, maintainers use ``git am`` to apply the patches.

If you are new to ``git`` then send your first patch to yourself.  Save it
as raw text including all the headers.  Run ``git am raw_email.txt`` and
then review the changelog with ``git log``.  When that works then send
the patch to the appropriate mailing list(s).

General Preferences
-------------------

Patches for the Linux kernel are submitted via email, preferably as
inline text in the body of the email.  Some maintainers accept
attachments, but then the attachments should have content-type
``text/plain``.  However, attachments are generally frowned upon because
it makes quoting portions of the patch more difficult in the patch
review process.

It's also strongly recommended that you use plain text in your email body,
for patches and other emails alike. https://useplaintext.email may be useful
for information on how to configure your preferred email client, as well as
listing recommended email clients should you not already have a preference.

Email clients that are used for Linux kernel patches should send the
patch text untouched.  For example, they should not modify or delete tabs
or spaces, even at the beginning or end of lines.

Don't send patches with ``format=flowed``.  This can cause unexpected
and unwanted line breaks.

Don't let your email client do automatic word wrapping for you.
This can also corrupt your patch.

Email clients should not modify the character set encoding of the text.
Emailed patches should be in ASCII or UTF-8 encoding only.
If you configure your email client to send emails with UTF-8 encoding,
you avoid some possible charset problems.

Email clients should generate and maintain "References:" or "In-Reply-To:"
headers so that mail threading is not broken.

Copy-and-paste (or cut-and-paste) usually does not work for patches
because tabs are converted to spaces.  Using xclipboard, xclip, and/or
xcutsel may work, but it's best to test this for yourself or just avoid
copy-and-paste.

Don't use PGP/GPG signatures in mail that contains patches.
This breaks many scripts that read and apply the patches.
(This should be fixable.)

It's a good idea to send a patch to yourself, save the received message,
and successfully apply it with 'patch' before sending patches to Linux
mailing lists.


Some email client (MUA) hints
-----------------------------

Here are some specific MUA configuration hints for editing and sending
patches for the Linux kernel.  These are not meant to be complete
software package configuration summaries.


Legend:

- TUI = text-based user interface
- GUI = graphical user interface

Alpine (TUI)
************

Config options:

In the :menuselection:`Sending Preferences` section:

- :menuselection:`Do Not Send Flowed Text` must be ``enabled``
- :menuselection:`Strip Whitespace Before Sending` must be ``disabled``

When composing the message, the cursor should be placed where the patch
should appear, and then pressing :kbd:`CTRL-R` let you specify the patch file
to insert into the message.

Claws Mail (GUI)
****************

Works. Some people use this successfully for patches.

To insert a patch use :menuselection:`Message-->Insert File` (:kbd:`CTRL-I`)
or an external editor.

If the inserted patch has to be edited in the Claws composition window
"Auto wrapping" in
:menuselection:`Configuration-->Preferences-->Compose-->Wrapping` should be
disabled.

Evolution (GUI)
***************

Some people use this successfully for patches.

When composing mail select: Preformat
  from :menuselection:`Format-->Paragraph Style-->Preformatted` (:kbd:`CTRL-7`)
  or the toolbar

Then use:
:menuselection:`Insert-->Text File...` (:kbd:`ALT-N x`)
to insert the patch.

You can also ``diff -Nru old.c new.c | xclip``, select
:menuselection:`Preformat`, then paste with the middle button.

Kmail (GUI)
***********

Some people use Kmail successfully for patches.

The default setting of not composing in HTML is appropriate; do not
enable it.

When composing an email, under options, uncheck "word wrap". The only
disadvantage is any text you type in the email will not be word-wrapped
so you will have to manually word wrap text before the patch. The easiest
way around this is to compose your email with word wrap enabled, then save
it as a draft. Once you pull it up again from your drafts it is now hard
word-wrapped and you can uncheck "word wrap" without losing the existing
wrapping.

At the bottom of your email, put the commonly-used patch delimiter before
inserting your patch:  three hyphens (``---``).

Then from the :menuselection:`Message` menu item, select
:menuselection:`insert file` and choose your patch.
As an added bonus you can customise the message creation toolbar menu
and put the :menuselection:`insert file` icon there.

Make the composer window wide enough so that no lines wrap. As of
KMail 1.13.5 (KDE 4.5.4), KMail will apply word wrapping when sending
the email if the lines wrap in the composer window. Having word wrapping
disabled in the Options menu isn't enough. Thus, if your patch has very
long lines, you must make the composer window very wide before sending
the email. See: https://bugs.kde.org/show_bug.cgi?id=174034

You can safely GPG sign attachments, but inlined text is preferred for
patches so do not GPG sign them.  Signing patches that have been inserted
as inlined text will make them tricky to extract from their 7-bit encoding.

If you absolutely must send patches as attachments instead of inlining
them as text, right click on the attachment and select :menuselection:`properties`,
and highlight :menuselection:`Suggest automatic display` to make the attachment
inlined to make it more viewable.

When saving patches that are sent as inlined text, select the email that
contains the patch from the message list pane, right click and select
:menuselection:`save as`.  You can use the whole email unmodified as a patch
if it was properly composed.  Emails are saved as read-write for user only so
you will have to chmod them to make them group and world readable if you copy
them elsewhere.

Lotus Notes (GUI)
*****************

Run away from it.

IBM Verse (Web GUI)
*******************

See Lotus Notes.

Mutt (TUI)
**********

Plenty of Linux developers use ``mutt``, so it must work pretty well.

Mutt doesn't come with an editor, so whatever editor you use should be
used in a way that there are no automatic linebreaks.  Most editors have
an :menuselection:`insert file` option that inserts the contents of a file
unaltered.

To use ``vim`` with mutt::

  set editor="vi"

If using xclip, type the command::

  :set paste

before middle button or shift-insert or use::

  :r filename

if you want to include the patch inline.
(a)ttach works fine without ``set paste``.

You can also generate patches with ``git format-patch`` and then use Mutt
to send them::

    $ mutt -H 0001-some-bug-fix.patch

Config options:

It should work with default settings.
However, it's a good idea to set the ``send_charset`` to::

  set send_charset="us-ascii:utf-8"

Mutt is highly customizable. Here is a minimum configuration to start
using Mutt to send patches through Gmail::

  # .muttrc
  # ================  IMAP  ====================
  set imap_user = 'yourusername@gmail.com'
  set imap_pass = 'yourpassword'
  set spoolfile = imaps://imap.gmail.com/INBOX
  set folder = imaps://imap.gmail.com/
  set record="imaps://imap.gmail.com/[Gmail]/Sent Mail"
  set postponed="imaps://imap.gmail.com/[Gmail]/Drafts"
  set mbox="imaps://imap.gmail.com/[Gmail]/All Mail"

  # ================  SMTP  ====================
  set smtp_url = "smtp://username@smtp.gmail.com:587/"
  set smtp_pass = $imap_pass
  set ssl_force_tls = yes # Require encrypted connection

  # ================  Composition  ====================
  set editor = `echo \$EDITOR`
  set edit_headers = yes  # See the headers when editing
  set charset = UTF-8     # value of $LANG; also fallback for send_charset
  # Sender, email address, and sign-off line must match
  unset use_domain        # because joe@localhost is just embarrassing
  set realname = "YOUR NAME"
  set from = "username@gmail.com"
  set use_from = yes

The Mutt docs have lots more information:

    https://gitlab.com/muttmua/mutt/-/wikis/UseCases/Gmail

    http://www.mutt.org/doc/manual/

Pine (TUI)
**********

Pine has had some whitespace truncation issues in the past, but these
should all be fixed now.

Use alpine (pine's successor) if you can.

Config options:

- ``quell-flowed-text`` is needed for recent versions
- the ``no-strip-whitespace-before-send`` option is needed


Sylpheed (GUI)
**************

- Works well for inlining text (or using attachments).
- Allows use of an external editor.
- Is slow on large folders.
- Won't do TLS SMTP auth over a non-SSL connection.
- Has a helpful ruler bar in the compose window.
- Adding addresses to address book doesn't understand the display name
  properly.

Thunderbird (GUI)
*****************

Thunderbird is an Outlook clone that likes to mangle text, but there are ways
to coerce it into behaving.

After doing the modifications, this includes installing the extensions,
you need to restart Thunderbird.

- Allow use of an external editor:

  The easiest thing to do with Thunderbird and patches is to use extensions
  which open your favorite external editor.

  Here are some example extensions which are capable of doing this.

  - "External Editor Revived"

    https://github.com/Frederick888/external-editor-revived

    https://addons.thunderbird.net/en-GB/thunderbird/addon/external-editor-revived/

    It requires installing a "native messaging host".
    Please read the wiki which can be found here:
    https://github.com/Frederick888/external-editor-revived/wiki

  - "External Editor"

    https://github.com/exteditor/exteditor

    To do this, download and install the extension, then open the
    :menuselection:`compose` window, add a button for it using
    :menuselection:`View-->Toolbars-->Customize...`
    then just click on the new button when you wish to use the external editor.

    Please note that "External Editor" requires that your editor must not
    fork, or in other words, the editor must not return before closing.
    You may have to pass additional flags or change the settings of your
    editor. Most notably if you are using gvim then you must pass the -f
    option to gvim by putting ``/usr/bin/gvim --nofork"`` (if the binary is in
    ``/usr/bin``) to the text editor field in :menuselection:`external editor`
    settings. If you are using some other editor then please read its manual
    to find out how to do this.

To beat some sense out of the internal editor, do this:

- Edit your Thunderbird config settings so that it won't use ``format=flowed``!
  Go to your main window and find the button for your main dropdown menu.
  :menuselection:`Main Menu-->Preferences-->General-->Config Editor...`
  to bring up the thunderbird's registry editor.

  - Set ``mailnews.send_plaintext_flowed`` to ``false``

  - Set ``mailnews.wraplength`` from ``72`` to ``0``

- Don't write HTML messages! Go to the main window
  :menuselection:`Main Menu-->Account Settings-->youracc@server.something-->Composition & Addressing`!
  There you can disable the option "Compose messages in HTML format".

- Open messages only as plain text! Go to the main window
  :menuselection:`Main Menu-->View-->Message Body As-->Plain Text`!

TkRat (GUI)
***********

Works.  Use "Insert file..." or external editor.

Gmail (Web GUI)
***************

Does not work for sending patches.

Gmail web client converts tabs to spaces automatically.

At the same time it wraps lines every 78 chars with CRLF style line breaks
although tab2space problem can be solved with external editor.

Another problem is that Gmail will base64-encode any message that has a
non-ASCII character. That includes things like European names.

HacKerMaiL (TUI)
****************

HacKerMaiL (hkml) is a public-inbox based simple mails management tool that
doesn't require subscription of mailing lists.  It is developed and maintained
by the DAMON maintainer and aims to support simple development workflows for
DAMON and general kernel subsystems.  Refer to the README
(https://github.com/sjp38/hackermail/blob/master/README.md) for details.
.. _embargoed_hardware_issues:

Embargoed hardware issues
=========================

Scope
-----

Hardware issues which result in security problems are a different category
of security bugs than pure software bugs which only affect the Linux
kernel.

Hardware issues like Meltdown, Spectre, L1TF etc. must be treated
differently because they usually affect all Operating Systems ("OS") and
therefore need coordination across different OS vendors, distributions,
silicon vendors, hardware integrators, and other parties. For some of the
issues, software mitigations can depend on microcode or firmware updates,
which need further coordination.

.. _Contact:

Contact
-------

The Linux kernel hardware security team is separate from the regular Linux
kernel security team.

The team only handles developing fixes for embargoed hardware security
issues. Reports of pure software security bugs in the Linux kernel are not
handled by this team and the reporter will be guided to contact the regular
Linux kernel security team (:ref:`Documentation/admin-guide/
<securitybugs>`) instead.

The team can be contacted by email at <hardware-security@kernel.org>. This
is a private list of security officers who will help you coordinate a fix
according to our documented process.

The list is encrypted and email to the list can be sent by either PGP or
S/MIME encrypted and must be signed with the reporter's PGP key or S/MIME
certificate. The list's PGP key and S/MIME certificate are available from
the following URLs:

  - PGP: https://www.kernel.org/static/files/hardware-security.asc
  - S/MIME: https://www.kernel.org/static/files/hardware-security.crt

While hardware security issues are often handled by the affected silicon
vendor, we welcome contact from researchers or individuals who have
identified a potential hardware flaw.

Hardware security officers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The current team of hardware security officers:

  - Linus Torvalds (Linux Foundation Fellow)
  - Greg Kroah-Hartman (Linux Foundation Fellow)
  - Thomas Gleixner (Linux Foundation Fellow)

Operation of mailing-lists
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The encrypted mailing-lists which are used in our process are hosted on
Linux Foundation's IT infrastructure. By providing this service, members
of Linux Foundation's IT operations personnel technically have the
ability to access the embargoed information, but are obliged to
confidentiality by their employment contract. Linux Foundation IT
personnel are also responsible for operating and managing the rest of
kernel.org's infrastructure.

The Linux Foundation's current director of IT Project infrastructure is
Konstantin Ryabitsev.


Non-disclosure agreements
-------------------------

The Linux kernel hardware security team is not a formal body and therefore
unable to enter into any non-disclosure agreements.  The kernel community
is aware of the sensitive nature of such issues and offers a Memorandum of
Understanding instead.


Memorandum of Understanding
---------------------------

The Linux kernel community has a deep understanding of the requirement to
keep hardware security issues under embargo for coordination between
different OS vendors, distributors, silicon vendors, and other parties.

The Linux kernel community has successfully handled hardware security
issues in the past and has the necessary mechanisms in place to allow
community compliant development under embargo restrictions.

The Linux kernel community has a dedicated hardware security team for
initial contact, which oversees the process of handling such issues under
embargo rules.

The hardware security team identifies the developers (domain experts) who
will form the initial response team for a particular issue. The initial
response team can bring in further developers (domain experts) to address
the issue in the best technical way.

All involved developers pledge to adhere to the embargo rules and to keep
the received information confidential. Violation of the pledge will lead to
immediate exclusion from the current issue and removal from all related
mailing lists. In addition, the hardware security team will also exclude
the offender from future issues. The impact of this consequence is a highly
effective deterrent in our community. In case a violation happens the
hardware security team will inform the involved parties immediately. If you
or anyone else becomes aware of a potential violation, please report it
immediately to the Hardware security officers.


Process
^^^^^^^

Due to the globally distributed nature of Linux kernel development,
face-to-face meetings are almost impossible to address hardware security
issues.  Phone conferences are hard to coordinate due to time zones and
other factors and should be only used when absolutely necessary. Encrypted
email has been proven to be the most effective and secure communication
method for these types of issues.

Start of Disclosure
"""""""""""""""""""

Disclosure starts by emailing the Linux kernel hardware security team per
the Contact section above.  This initial contact should contain a
description of the problem and a list of any known affected silicon. If
your organization builds or distributes the affected hardware, we encourage
you to also consider what other hardware could be affected.  The disclosing
party is responsible for contacting the affected silicon vendors in a
timely manner.

The hardware security team will provide an incident-specific encrypted
mailing list which will be used for initial discussion with the reporter,
further disclosure, and coordination of fixes.

The hardware security team will provide the disclosing party a list of
developers (domain experts) who should be informed initially about the
issue after confirming with the developers that they will adhere to this
Memorandum of Understanding and the documented process. These developers
form the initial response team and will be responsible for handling the
issue after initial contact. The hardware security team is supporting the
response team, but is not necessarily involved in the mitigation
development process.

While individual developers might be covered by a non-disclosure agreement
via their employer, they cannot enter individual non-disclosure agreements
in their role as Linux kernel developers. They will, however, agree to
adhere to this documented process and the Memorandum of Understanding.

The disclosing party should provide a list of contacts for all other
entities who have already been, or should be, informed about the issue.
This serves several purposes:

 - The list of disclosed entities allows communication across the
   industry, e.g. other OS vendors, HW vendors, etc.

 - The disclosed entities can be contacted to name experts who should
   participate in the mitigation development.

 - If an expert who is required to handle an issue is employed by a listed
   entity or member of an listed entity, then the response teams can
   request the disclosure of that expert from that entity. This ensures
   that the expert is also part of the entity's response team.

Disclosure
""""""""""

The disclosing party provides detailed information to the initial response
team via the specific encrypted mailing-list.

From our experience, the technical documentation of these issues is usually
a sufficient starting point, and further technical clarification is best
done via email.

Mitigation development
""""""""""""""""""""""

The initial response team sets up an encrypted mailing-list or repurposes
an existing one if appropriate.

Using a mailing list is close to the normal Linux development process and
has been successfully used to develop mitigations for various hardware
security issues in the past.

The mailing list operates in the same way as normal Linux development.
Patches are posted, discussed, and reviewed and if agreed upon, applied to
a non-public git repository which is only accessible to the participating
developers via a secure connection. The repository contains the main
development branch against the mainline kernel and backport branches for
stable kernel versions as necessary.

The initial response team will identify further experts from the Linux
kernel developer community as needed.  Any involved party can suggest
further experts to be included, each of which will be subject to the same
requirements outlined above.

Bringing in experts can happen at any time in the development process and
needs to be handled in a timely manner.

If an expert is employed by or a member of an entity on the disclosure list
provided by the disclosing party, then participation will be requested from
the relevant entity.

If not, then the disclosing party will be informed about the experts'
participation. The experts are covered by the Memorandum of Understanding
and the disclosing party is requested to acknowledge their participation.
In the case where the disclosing party has a compelling reason to object,
any objection must to be raised within five working days and resolved with
the incident team immediately. If the disclosing party does not react
within five working days this is taken as silent acknowledgment.

After the incident team acknowledges or resolves an objection, the expert
is disclosed and brought into the development process.

List participants may not communicate about the issue outside of the
private mailing list. List participants may not use any shared resources
(e.g. employer build farms, CI systems, etc) when working on patches.

Early access
""""""""""""

The patches discussed and developed on the list can neither be distributed
to any individual who is not a member of the response team nor to any other
organization.

To allow the affected silicon vendors to work with their internal teams and
industry partners on testing, validation, and logistics, the following
exception is provided:

	Designated representatives of the affected silicon vendors are
	allowed to hand over the patches at any time to the silicon
	vendor’s response team. The representative must notify the kernel
	response team about the handover. The affected silicon vendor must
	have and maintain their own documented security process for any
	patches shared with their response team that is consistent with
	this policy.

	The silicon vendor’s response team can distribute these patches to
	their industry partners and to their internal teams under the
	silicon vendor’s documented security process. Feedback from the
	industry partners goes back to the silicon vendor and is
	communicated by the silicon vendor to the kernel response team.

	The handover to the silicon vendor’s response team removes any
	responsibility or liability from the kernel response team regarding
	premature disclosure, which happens due to the involvement of the
	silicon vendor’s internal teams or industry partners. The silicon
	vendor guarantees this release of liability by agreeing to this
	process.

Coordinated release
"""""""""""""""""""

The involved parties will negotiate the date and time when the embargo
ends. At that point, the prepared mitigations are published into the
relevant kernel trees.  There is no pre-notification process: the
mitigations are published in public and available to everyone at the same
time.

While we understand that hardware security issues need coordinated embargo
time, the embargo time should be constrained to the minimum time that is
required for all involved parties to develop, test, and prepare their
mitigations. Extending embargo time artificially to meet conference talk
dates or other non-technical reasons creates more work and burden for the
involved developers and response teams as the patches need to be kept up to
date in order to follow the ongoing upstream kernel development, which
might create conflicting changes.

CVE assignment
""""""""""""""

Neither the hardware security team nor the initial response team assign
CVEs, nor are CVEs required for the development process. If CVEs are
provided by the disclosing party they can be used for documentation
purposes.

Process ambassadors
-------------------

For assistance with this process we have established ambassadors in various
organizations, who can answer questions about or provide guidance on the
reporting process and further handling. Ambassadors are not involved in the
disclosure of a particular issue, unless requested by a response team or by
an involved disclosed party. The current ambassadors list:

  ============= ========================================================
  AMD		Tom Lendacky <thomas.lendacky@amd.com>
  Ampere	Darren Hart <darren@os.amperecomputing.com>
  ARM		Catalin Marinas <catalin.marinas@arm.com>
  IBM Power	Michael Ellerman <ellerman@au.ibm.com>
  IBM Z		Christian Borntraeger <borntraeger@de.ibm.com>
  Intel		Tony Luck <tony.luck@intel.com>
  Qualcomm	Trilok Soni <quic_tsoni@quicinc.com>
  RISC-V	Palmer Dabbelt <palmer@dabbelt.com>
  Samsung	Javier González <javier.gonz@samsung.com>

  Microsoft	James Morris <jamorris@linux.microsoft.com>
  Xen		Andrew Cooper <andrew.cooper3@citrix.com>

  Canonical	John Johansen <john.johansen@canonical.com>
  Debian	Ben Hutchings <ben@decadent.org.uk>
  Oracle	Konrad Rzeszutek Wilk <konrad.wilk@oracle.com>
  Red Hat	Josh Poimboeuf <jpoimboe@redhat.com>
  SUSE		Jiri Kosina <jkosina@suse.cz>

  Google	Kees Cook <keescook@chromium.org>

  LLVM		Nick Desaulniers <ndesaulniers@google.com>
  ============= ========================================================

If you want your organization to be added to the ambassadors list, please
contact the hardware security team. The nominated ambassador has to
understand and support our process fully and is ideally well-connected in
the Linux kernel community.

Encrypted mailing-lists
-----------------------

We use encrypted mailing lists for communication. The operating principle
of these lists is that email sent to the list is encrypted either with the
list's PGP key or with the list's S/MIME certificate. The mailing list
software decrypts the email and re-encrypts it individually for each
subscriber with the subscriber's PGP key or S/MIME certificate. Details
about the mailing list software and the setup that is used to ensure the
security of the lists and protection of the data can be found here:
https://korg.wiki.kernel.org/userdoc/remail.

List keys
^^^^^^^^^

For initial contact see the :ref:`Contact` section above. For incident
specific mailing lists, the key and S/MIME certificate are conveyed to the
subscribers by email sent from the specific list.

Subscription to incident-specific lists
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Subscription to incident-specific lists is handled by the response teams.
Disclosed parties who want to participate in the communication send a list
of potential experts to the response team so the response team can validate
subscription requests.

Each subscriber needs to send a subscription request to the response team
by email. The email must be signed with the subscriber's PGP key or S/MIME
certificate. If a PGP key is used, it must be available from a public key
server and is ideally connected to the Linux kernel's PGP web of trust. See
also: https://www.kernel.org/signature.html.

The response team verifies that the subscriber request is valid and adds
the subscriber to the list. After subscription the subscriber will receive
email from the mailing-list which is signed either with the list's PGP key
or the list's S/MIME certificate. The subscriber's email client can extract
the PGP key or the S/MIME certificate from the signature so the subscriber
can send encrypted email to the list.

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: (GPL-2.0+ OR CC-BY-4.0)
.. See the bottom of this file for additional redistribution information.

Handling regressions
++++++++++++++++++++

*We don't cause regressions* -- this document describes what this "first rule of
Linux kernel development" means in practice for developers. It complements
Documentation/admin-guide/reporting-regressions.rst, which covers the topic from a
user's point of view; if you never read that text, go and at least skim over it
before continuing here.

The important bits (aka "The TL;DR")
====================================

#. Ensure subscribers of the `regression mailing list <https://lore.kernel.org/regressions/>`_
   (regressions@lists.linux.dev) quickly become aware of any new regression
   report:

    * When receiving a mailed report that did not CC the list, bring it into the
      loop by immediately sending at least a brief "Reply-all" with the list
      CCed.

    * Forward or bounce any reports submitted in bug trackers to the list.

#. Make the Linux kernel regression tracking bot "regzbot" track the issue (this
   is optional, but recommended):

    * For mailed reports, check if the reporter included a line like ``#regzbot
      introduced: v5.13..v5.14-rc1``. If not, send a reply (with the regressions
      list in CC) containing a paragraph like the following, which tells regzbot
      when the issue started to happen::

       #regzbot ^introduced: 1f2e3d4c5b6a

    * When forwarding reports from a bug tracker to the regressions list (see
      above), include a paragraph like the following::

       #regzbot introduced: v5.13..v5.14-rc1
       #regzbot from: Some N. Ice Human <some.human@example.com>
       #regzbot monitor: http://some.bugtracker.example.com/ticket?id=123456789

#. When submitting fixes for regressions, add "Closes:" tags to the patch
   description pointing to all places where the issue was reported, as
   mandated by Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst and
   :ref:`Documentation/process/5.Posting.rst <development_posting>`. If you are
   only fixing part of the issue that caused the regression, you may use
   "Link:" tags instead. regzbot currently makes no distinction between the
   two.

#. Try to fix regressions quickly once the culprit has been identified; fixes
   for most regressions should be merged within two weeks, but some need to be
   resolved within two or three days.


All the details on Linux kernel regressions relevant for developers
===================================================================


The important basics in more detail
-----------------------------------


What to do when receiving regression reports
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ensure the Linux kernel's regression tracker and others subscribers of the
`regression mailing list <https://lore.kernel.org/regressions/>`_
(regressions@lists.linux.dev) become aware of any newly reported regression:

 * When you receive a report by mail that did not CC the list, immediately bring
   it into the loop by sending at least a brief "Reply-all" with the list CCed;
   try to ensure it gets CCed again in case you reply to a reply that omitted
   the list.

 * If a report submitted in a bug tracker hits your Inbox, forward or bounce it
   to the list. Consider checking the list archives beforehand, if the reporter
   already forwarded the report as instructed by
   Documentation/admin-guide/reporting-issues.rst.

When doing either, consider making the Linux kernel regression tracking bot
"regzbot" immediately start tracking the issue:

 * For mailed reports, check if the reporter included a "regzbot command" like
   ``#regzbot introduced: 1f2e3d4c5b6a``. If not, send a reply (with the
   regressions list in CC) with a paragraph like the following:::

       #regzbot ^introduced: v5.13..v5.14-rc1

   This tells regzbot the version range in which the issue started to happen;
   you can specify a range using commit-ids as well or state a single commit-id
   in case the reporter bisected the culprit.

   Note the caret (^) before the "introduced": it tells regzbot to treat the
   parent mail (the one you reply to) as the initial report for the regression
   you want to see tracked; that's important, as regzbot will later look out
   for patches with "Closes:" tags pointing to the report in the archives on
   lore.kernel.org.

 * When forwarding a regression reported to a bug tracker, include a paragraph
   with these regzbot commands::

       #regzbot introduced: 1f2e3d4c5b6a
       #regzbot from: Some N. Ice Human <some.human@example.com>
       #regzbot monitor: http://some.bugtracker.example.com/ticket?id=123456789

   Regzbot will then automatically associate patches with the report that
   contain "Closes:" tags pointing to your mail or the mentioned ticket.

What's important when fixing regressions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You don't need to do anything special when submitting fixes for regression, just
remember to do what Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst,
:ref:`Documentation/process/5.Posting.rst <development_posting>`, and
Documentation/process/stable-kernel-rules.rst already explain in more detail:

 * Point to all places where the issue was reported using "Closes:" tags::

       Closes: https://lore.kernel.org/r/30th.anniversary.repost@klaava.Helsinki.FI/
       Closes: https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1234567890

   If you are only fixing part of the issue, you may use "Link:" instead as
   described in the first document mentioned above. regzbot currently treats
   both of these equivalently and considers the linked reports as resolved.

 * Add a "Fixes:" tag to specify the commit causing the regression.

 * If the culprit was merged in an earlier development cycle, explicitly mark
   the fix for backporting using the ``Cc: stable@vger.kernel.org`` tag.

All this is expected from you and important when it comes to regression, as
these tags are of great value for everyone (you included) that might be looking
into the issue weeks, months, or years later. These tags are also crucial for
tools and scripts used by other kernel developers or Linux distributions; one of
these tools is regzbot, which heavily relies on the "Closes:" tags to associate
reports for regression with changes resolving them.

Expectations and best practices for fixing regressions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a Linux kernel developer, you are expected to give your best to prevent
situations where a regression caused by a recent change of yours leaves users
only these options:

 * Run a kernel with a regression that impacts usage.

 * Switch to an older or newer kernel series.

 * Continue running an outdated and thus potentially insecure kernel for more
   than three weeks after the regression's culprit was identified. Ideally it
   should be less than two. And it ought to be just a few days, if the issue is
   severe or affects many users -- either in general or in prevalent
   environments.

How to realize that in practice depends on various factors. Use the following
rules of thumb as a guide.

In general:

 * Prioritize work on regressions over all other Linux kernel work, unless the
   latter concerns a severe issue (e.g. acute security vulnerability, data loss,
   bricked hardware, ...).

 * Expedite fixing mainline regressions that recently made it into a proper
   mainline, stable, or longterm release (either directly or via backport).

 * Do not consider regressions from the current cycle as something that can wait
   till the end of the cycle, as the issue might discourage or prevent users and
   CI systems from testing mainline now or generally.

 * Work with the required care to avoid additional or bigger damage, even if
   resolving an issue then might take longer than outlined below.

On timing once the culprit of a regression is known:

 * Aim to mainline a fix within two or three days, if the issue is severe or
   bothering many users -- either in general or in prevalent conditions like a
   particular hardware environment, distribution, or stable/longterm series.

 * Aim to mainline a fix by Sunday after the next, if the culprit made it
   into a recent mainline, stable, or longterm release (either directly or via
   backport); if the culprit became known early during a week and is simple to
   resolve, try to mainline the fix within the same week.

 * For other regressions, aim to mainline fixes before the hindmost Sunday
   within the next three weeks. One or two Sundays later are acceptable, if the
   regression is something people can live with easily for a while -- like a
   mild performance regression.

 * It's strongly discouraged to delay mainlining regression fixes till the next
   merge window, except when the fix is extraordinarily risky or when the
   culprit was mainlined more than a year ago.

On procedure:

 * Always consider reverting the culprit, as it's often the quickest and least
   dangerous way to fix a regression. Don't worry about mainlining a fixed
   variant later: that should be straight-forward, as most of the code went
   through review once already.

 * Try to resolve any regressions introduced in mainline during the past
   twelve months before the current development cycle ends: Linus wants such
   regressions to be handled like those from the current cycle, unless fixing
   bears unusual risks.

 * Consider CCing Linus on discussions or patch review, if a regression seems
   tangly. Do the same in precarious or urgent cases -- especially if the
   subsystem maintainer might be unavailable. Also CC the stable team, when you
   know such a regression made it into a mainline, stable, or longterm release.

 * For urgent regressions, consider asking Linus to pick up the fix straight
   from the mailing list: he is totally fine with that for uncontroversial
   fixes. Ideally though such requests should happen in accordance with the
   subsystem maintainers or come directly from them.

 * In case you are unsure if a fix is worth the risk applying just days before
   a new mainline release, send Linus a mail with the usual lists and people in
   CC; in it, summarize the situation while asking him to consider picking up
   the fix straight from the list. He then himself can make the call and when
   needed even postpone the release. Such requests again should ideally happen
   in accordance with the subsystem maintainers or come directly from them.

Regarding stable and longterm kernels:

 * You are free to leave regressions to the stable team, if they at no point in
   time occurred with mainline or were fixed there already.

 * If a regression made it into a proper mainline release during the past
   twelve months, ensure to tag the fix with "Cc: stable@vger.kernel.org", as a
   "Fixes:" tag alone does not guarantee a backport. Please add the same tag,
   in case you know the culprit was backported to stable or longterm kernels.

 * When receiving reports about regressions in recent stable or longterm kernel
   series, please evaluate at least briefly if the issue might happen in current
   mainline as well -- and if that seems likely, take hold of the report. If in
   doubt, ask the reporter to check mainline.

 * Whenever you want to swiftly resolve a regression that recently also made it
   into a proper mainline, stable, or longterm release, fix it quickly in
   mainline; when appropriate thus involve Linus to fast-track the fix (see
   above). That's because the stable team normally does neither revert nor fix
   any changes that cause the same problems in mainline.

 * In case of urgent regression fixes you might want to ensure prompt
   backporting by dropping the stable team a note once the fix was mainlined;
   this is especially advisable during merge windows and shortly thereafter, as
   the fix otherwise might land at the end of a huge patch queue.

On patch flow:

 * Developers, when trying to reach the time periods mentioned above, remember
   to account for the time it takes to get fixes tested, reviewed, and merged by
   Linus, ideally with them being in linux-next at least briefly. Hence, if a
   fix is urgent, make it obvious to ensure others handle it appropriately.

 * Reviewers, you are kindly asked to assist developers in reaching the time
   periods mentioned above by reviewing regression fixes in a timely manner.

 * Subsystem maintainers, you likewise are encouraged to expedite the handling
   of regression fixes. Thus evaluate if skipping linux-next is an option for
   the particular fix. Also consider sending git pull requests more often than
   usual when needed. And try to avoid holding onto regression fixes over
   weekends -- especially when the fix is marked for backporting.


More aspects regarding regressions developers should be aware of
----------------------------------------------------------------


How to deal with changes where a risk of regression is known
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Evaluate how big the risk of regressions is, for example by performing a code
search in Linux distributions and Git forges. Also consider asking other
developers or projects likely to be affected to evaluate or even test the
proposed change; if problems surface, maybe some solution acceptable for all
can be found.

If the risk of regressions in the end seems to be relatively small, go ahead
with the change, but let all involved parties know about the risk. Hence, make
sure your patch description makes this aspect obvious. Once the change is
merged, tell the Linux kernel's regression tracker and the regressions mailing
list about the risk, so everyone has the change on the radar in case reports
trickle in. Depending on the risk, you also might want to ask the subsystem
maintainer to mention the issue in his mainline pull request.

What else is there to known about regressions?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Check out Documentation/admin-guide/reporting-regressions.rst, it covers a lot
of other aspects you want might want to be aware of:

 * the purpose of the "no regressions" rule

 * what issues actually qualify as regression

 * who's in charge for finding the root cause of a regression

 * how to handle tricky situations, e.g. when a regression is caused by a
   security fix or when fixing a regression might cause another one

Whom to ask for advice when it comes to regressions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Send a mail to the regressions mailing list (regressions@lists.linux.dev) while
CCing the Linux kernel's regression tracker (regressions@leemhuis.info); if the
issue might better be dealt with in private, feel free to omit the list.


More about regression tracking and regzbot
------------------------------------------


Why the Linux kernel has a regression tracker, and why is regzbot used?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Rules like "no regressions" need someone to ensure they are followed, otherwise
they are broken either accidentally or on purpose. History has shown this to be
true for the Linux kernel as well. That's why Thorsten Leemhuis volunteered to
keep an eye on things as the Linux kernel's regression tracker, who's
occasionally helped by other people. Neither of them are paid to do this,
that's why regression tracking is done on a best effort basis.

Earlier attempts to manually track regressions have shown it's an exhausting and
frustrating work, which is why they were abandoned after a while. To prevent
this from happening again, Thorsten developed regzbot to facilitate the work,
with the long term goal to automate regression tracking as much as possible for
everyone involved.

How does regression tracking work with regzbot?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The bot watches for replies to reports of tracked regressions. Additionally,
it's looking out for posted or committed patches referencing such reports
with "Closes:" tags; replies to such patch postings are tracked as well.
Combined this data provides good insights into the current state of the fixing
process.

Regzbot tries to do its job with as little overhead as possible for both
reporters and developers. In fact, only reporters are burdened with an extra
duty: they need to tell regzbot about the regression report using the ``#regzbot
introduced`` command outlined above; if they don't do that, someone else can
take care of that using ``#regzbot ^introduced``.

For developers there normally is no extra work involved, they just need to make
sure to do something that was expected long before regzbot came to light: add
links to the patch description pointing to all reports about the issue fixed.

Do I have to use regzbot?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It's in the interest of everyone if you do, as kernel maintainers like Linus
Torvalds partly rely on regzbot's tracking in their work -- for example when
deciding to release a new version or extend the development phase. For this they
need to be aware of all unfixed regression; to do that, Linus is known to look
into the weekly reports sent by regzbot.

Do I have to tell regzbot about every regression I stumble upon?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ideally yes: we are all humans and easily forget problems when something more
important unexpectedly comes up -- for example a bigger problem in the Linux
kernel or something in real life that's keeping us away from keyboards for a
while. Hence, it's best to tell regzbot about every regression, except when you
immediately write a fix and commit it to a tree regularly merged to the affected
kernel series.

How to see which regressions regzbot tracks currently?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Check `regzbot's web-interface <https://linux-regtracking.leemhuis.info/regzbot/>`_
for the latest info; alternatively, `search for the latest regression report
<https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/?q=%22Linux+regressions+report%22+f%3Aregzbot>`_,
which regzbot normally sends out once a week on Sunday evening (UTC), which is a
few hours before Linus usually publishes new (pre-)releases.

What places is regzbot monitoring?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Regzbot is watching the most important Linux mailing lists as well as the git
repositories of linux-next, mainline, and stable/longterm.

What kind of issues are supposed to be tracked by regzbot?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The bot is meant to track regressions, hence please don't involve regzbot for
regular issues. But it's okay for the Linux kernel's regression tracker if you
use regzbot to track severe issues, like reports about hangs, corrupted data,
or internal errors (Panic, Oops, BUG(), warning, ...).

Can I add regressions found by CI systems to regzbot's tracking?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Feel free to do so, if the particular regression likely has impact on practical
use cases and thus might be noticed by users; hence, please don't involve
regzbot for theoretical regressions unlikely to show themselves in real world
usage.

How to interact with regzbot?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By using a 'regzbot command' in a direct or indirect reply to the mail with the
regression report. These commands need to be in their own paragraph (IOW: they
need to be separated from the rest of the mail using blank lines).

One such command is ``#regzbot introduced: <version or commit>``, which makes
regzbot consider your mail as a regressions report added to the tracking, as
already described above; ``#regzbot ^introduced: <version or commit>`` is another
such command, which makes regzbot consider the parent mail as a report for a
regression which it starts to track.

Once one of those two commands has been utilized, other regzbot commands can be
used in direct or indirect replies to the report. You can write them below one
of the `introduced` commands or in replies to the mail that used one of them
or itself is a reply to that mail:

 * Set or update the title::

       #regzbot title: foo

 * Monitor a discussion or bugzilla.kernel.org ticket where additions aspects of
   the issue or a fix are discussed -- for example the posting of a patch fixing
   the regression::

       #regzbot monitor: https://lore.kernel.org/all/30th.anniversary.repost@klaava.Helsinki.FI/

   Monitoring only works for lore.kernel.org and bugzilla.kernel.org; regzbot
   will consider all messages in that thread or ticket as related to the fixing
   process.

 * Point to a place with further details of interest, like a mailing list post
   or a ticket in a bug tracker that are slightly related, but about a different
   topic::

       #regzbot link: https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=123456789

 * Mark a regression as fixed by a commit that is heading upstream or already
   landed::

       #regzbot fix: 1f2e3d4c5d

 * Mark a regression as a duplicate of another one already tracked by regzbot::

       #regzbot dup-of: https://lore.kernel.org/all/30th.anniversary.repost@klaava.Helsinki.FI/

 * Mark a regression as invalid::

       #regzbot invalid: wasn't a regression, problem has always existed

Is there more to tell about regzbot and its commands?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

More detailed and up-to-date information about the Linux
kernel's regression tracking bot can be found on its
`project page <https://gitlab.com/knurd42/regzbot>`_, which among others
contains a `getting started guide <https://gitlab.com/knurd42/regzbot/-/blob/main/docs/getting_started.md>`_
and `reference documentation <https://gitlab.com/knurd42/regzbot/-/blob/main/docs/reference.md>`_
which both cover more details than the above section.

Quotes from Linus about regression
----------------------------------

Find below a few real life examples of how Linus Torvalds expects regressions to
be handled:

 * From `2017-10-26 (1/2)
   <https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/CA+55aFwiiQYJ+YoLKCXjN_beDVfu38mg=Ggg5LFOcqHE8Qi7Zw@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       If you break existing user space setups THAT IS A REGRESSION.

       It's not ok to say "but we'll fix the user space setup".

       Really. NOT OK.

       [...]

       The first rule is:

        - we don't cause regressions

       and the corollary is that when regressions *do* occur, we admit to
       them and fix them, instead of blaming user space.

       The fact that you have apparently been denying the regression now for
       three weeks means that I will revert, and I will stop pulling apparmor
       requests until the people involved understand how kernel development
       is done.

 * From `2017-10-26 (2/2)
   <https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/CA+55aFxW7NMAMvYhkvz1UPbUTUJewRt6Yb51QAx5RtrWOwjebg@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       People should basically always feel like they can update their kernel
       and simply not have to worry about it.

       I refuse to introduce "you can only update the kernel if you also
       update that other program" kind of limitations. If the kernel used to
       work for you, the rule is that it continues to work for you.

       There have been exceptions, but they are few and far between, and they
       generally have some major and fundamental reasons for having happened,
       that were basically entirely unavoidable, and people _tried_hard_ to
       avoid them. Maybe we can't practically support the hardware any more
       after it is decades old and nobody uses it with modern kernels any
       more. Maybe there's a serious security issue with how we did things,
       and people actually depended on that fundamentally broken model. Maybe
       there was some fundamental other breakage that just _had_ to have a
       flag day for very core and fundamental reasons.

       And notice that this is very much about *breaking* peoples environments.

       Behavioral changes happen, and maybe we don't even support some
       feature any more. There's a number of fields in /proc/<pid>/stat that
       are printed out as zeroes, simply because they don't even *exist* in
       the kernel any more, or because showing them was a mistake (typically
       an information leak). But the numbers got replaced by zeroes, so that
       the code that used to parse the fields still works. The user might not
       see everything they used to see, and so behavior is clearly different,
       but things still _work_, even if they might no longer show sensitive
       (or no longer relevant) information.

       But if something actually breaks, then the change must get fixed or
       reverted. And it gets fixed in the *kernel*. Not by saying "well, fix
       your user space then". It was a kernel change that exposed the
       problem, it needs to be the kernel that corrects for it, because we
       have a "upgrade in place" model. We don't have a "upgrade with new
       user space".

       And I seriously will refuse to take code from people who do not
       understand and honor this very simple rule.

       This rule is also not going to change.

       And yes, I realize that the kernel is "special" in this respect. I'm
       proud of it.

       I have seen, and can point to, lots of projects that go "We need to
       break that use case in order to make progress" or "you relied on
       undocumented behavior, it sucks to be you" or "there's a better way to
       do what you want to do, and you have to change to that new better
       way", and I simply don't think that's acceptable outside of very early
       alpha releases that have experimental users that know what they signed
       up for. The kernel hasn't been in that situation for the last two
       decades.

       We do API breakage _inside_ the kernel all the time. We will fix
       internal problems by saying "you now need to do XYZ", but then it's
       about internal kernel API's, and the people who do that then also
       obviously have to fix up all the in-kernel users of that API. Nobody
       can say "I now broke the API you used, and now _you_ need to fix it
       up". Whoever broke something gets to fix it too.

       And we simply do not break user space.

 * From `2020-05-21
   <https://lore.kernel.org/all/CAHk-=wiVi7mSrsMP=fLXQrXK_UimybW=ziLOwSzFTtoXUacWVQ@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       The rules about regressions have never been about any kind of
       documented behavior, or where the code lives.

       The rules about regressions are always about "breaks user workflow".

       Users are literally the _only_ thing that matters.

       No amount of "you shouldn't have used this" or "that behavior was
       undefined, it's your own fault your app broke" or "that used to work
       simply because of a kernel bug" is at all relevant.

       Now, reality is never entirely black-and-white. So we've had things
       like "serious security issue" etc that just forces us to make changes
       that may break user space. But even then the rule is that we don't
       really have other options that would allow things to continue.

       And obviously, if users take years to even notice that something
       broke, or if we have sane ways to work around the breakage that
       doesn't make for too much trouble for users (ie "ok, there are a
       handful of users, and they can use a kernel command line to work
       around it" kind of things) we've also been a bit less strict.

       But no, "that was documented to be broken" (whether it's because the
       code was in staging or because the man-page said something else) is
       irrelevant. If staging code is so useful that people end up using it,
       that means that it's basically regular kernel code with a flag saying
       "please clean this up".

       The other side of the coin is that people who talk about "API
       stability" are entirely wrong. API's don't matter either. You can make
       any changes to an API you like - as long as nobody notices.

       Again, the regression rule is not about documentation, not about
       API's, and not about the phase of the moon.

       It's entirely about "we caused problems for user space that used to work".

 * From `2017-11-05
   <https://lore.kernel.org/all/CA+55aFzUvbGjD8nQ-+3oiMBx14c_6zOj2n7KLN3UsJ-qsd4Dcw@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       And our regression rule has never been "behavior doesn't change".
       That would mean that we could never make any changes at all.

       For example, we do things like add new error handling etc all the
       time, which we then sometimes even add tests for in our kselftest
       directory.

       So clearly behavior changes all the time and we don't consider that a
       regression per se.

       The rule for a regression for the kernel is that some real user
       workflow breaks. Not some test. Not a "look, I used to be able to do
       X, now I can't".

 * From `2018-08-03
   <https://lore.kernel.org/all/CA+55aFwWZX=CXmWDTkDGb36kf12XmTehmQjbiMPCqCRG2hi9kw@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       YOU ARE MISSING THE #1 KERNEL RULE.

       We do not regress, and we do not regress exactly because your are 100% wrong.

       And the reason you state for your opinion is in fact exactly *WHY* you
       are wrong.

       Your "good reasons" are pure and utter garbage.

       The whole point of "we do not regress" is so that people can upgrade
       the kernel and never have to worry about it.

       > Kernel had a bug which has been fixed

       That is *ENTIRELY* immaterial.

       Guys, whether something was buggy or not DOES NOT MATTER.

       Why?

       Bugs happen. That's a fact of life. Arguing that "we had to break
       something because we were fixing a bug" is completely insane. We fix
       tens of bugs every single day, thinking that "fixing a bug" means that
       we can break something is simply NOT TRUE.

       So bugs simply aren't even relevant to the discussion. They happen,
       they get found, they get fixed, and it has nothing to do with "we
       break users".

       Because the only thing that matters IS THE USER.

       How hard is that to understand?

       Anybody who uses "but it was buggy" as an argument is entirely missing
       the point. As far as the USER was concerned, it wasn't buggy - it
       worked for him/her.

       Maybe it worked *because* the user had taken the bug into account,
       maybe it worked because the user didn't notice - again, it doesn't
       matter. It worked for the user.

       Breaking a user workflow for a "bug" is absolutely the WORST reason
       for breakage you can imagine.

       It's basically saying "I took something that worked, and I broke it,
       but now it's better". Do you not see how f*cking insane that statement
       is?

       And without users, your program is not a program, it's a pointless
       piece of code that you might as well throw away.

       Seriously. This is *why* the #1 rule for kernel development is "we
       don't break users". Because "I fixed a bug" is absolutely NOT AN
       ARGUMENT if that bug fix broke a user setup. You actually introduced a
       MUCH BIGGER bug by "fixing" something that the user clearly didn't
       even care about.

       And dammit, we upgrade the kernel ALL THE TIME without upgrading any
       other programs at all. It is absolutely required, because flag-days
       and dependencies are horribly bad.

       And it is also required simply because I as a kernel developer do not
       upgrade random other tools that I don't even care about as I develop
       the kernel, and I want any of my users to feel safe doing the same
       time.

       So no. Your rule is COMPLETELY wrong. If you cannot upgrade a kernel
       without upgrading some other random binary, then we have a problem.

 * From `2021-06-05
   <https://lore.kernel.org/all/CAHk-=wiUVqHN76YUwhkjZzwTdjMMJf_zN4+u7vEJjmEGh3recw@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       THERE ARE NO VALID ARGUMENTS FOR REGRESSIONS.

       Honestly, security people need to understand that "not working" is not
       a success case of security. It's a failure case.

       Yes, "not working" may be secure. But security in that case is *pointless*.

 * From `2011-05-06 (1/3)
   <https://lore.kernel.org/all/BANLkTim9YvResB+PwRp7QTK-a5VNg2PvmQ@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       Binary compatibility is more important.

       And if binaries don't use the interface to parse the format (or just
       parse it wrongly - see the fairly recent example of adding uuid's to
       /proc/self/mountinfo), then it's a regression.

       And regressions get reverted, unless there are security issues or
       similar that makes us go "Oh Gods, we really have to break things".

       I don't understand why this simple logic is so hard for some kernel
       developers to understand. Reality matters. Your personal wishes matter
       NOT AT ALL.

       If you made an interface that can be used without parsing the
       interface description, then we're stuck with the interface. Theory
       simply doesn't matter.

       You could help fix the tools, and try to avoid the compatibility
       issues that way. There aren't that many of them.

   From `2011-05-06 (2/3)
   <https://lore.kernel.org/all/BANLkTi=KVXjKR82sqsz4gwjr+E0vtqCmvA@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       it's clearly NOT an internal tracepoint. By definition. It's being
       used by powertop.

   From `2011-05-06 (3/3)
   <https://lore.kernel.org/all/BANLkTinazaXRdGovYL7rRVp+j6HbJ7pzhg@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       We have programs that use that ABI and thus it's a regression if they break.

 * From `2012-07-06 <https://lore.kernel.org/all/CA+55aFwnLJ+0sjx92EGREGTWOx84wwKaraSzpTNJwPVV8edw8g@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       > Now this got me wondering if Debian _unstable_ actually qualifies as a
       > standard distro userspace.

       Oh, if the kernel breaks some standard user space, that counts. Tons
       of people run Debian unstable

 * From `2019-09-15
   <https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/CAHk-=wiP4K8DRJWsCo=20hn_6054xBamGKF2kPgUzpB5aMaofA@mail.gmail.com/>`_::

       One _particularly_ last-minute revert is the top-most commit (ignoring
       the version change itself) done just before the release, and while
       it's very annoying, it's perhaps also instructive.

       What's instructive about it is that I reverted a commit that wasn't
       actually buggy. In fact, it was doing exactly what it set out to do,
       and did it very well. In fact it did it _so_ well that the much
       improved IO patterns it caused then ended up revealing a user-visible
       regression due to a real bug in a completely unrelated area.

       The actual details of that regression are not the reason I point that
       revert out as instructive, though. It's more that it's an instructive
       example of what counts as a regression, and what the whole "no
       regressions" kernel rule means. The reverted commit didn't change any
       API's, and it didn't introduce any new bugs. But it ended up exposing
       another problem, and as such caused a kernel upgrade to fail for a
       user. So it got reverted.

       The point here being that we revert based on user-reported _behavior_,
       not based on some "it changes the ABI" or "it caused a bug" concept.
       The problem was really pre-existing, and it just didn't happen to
       trigger before. The better IO patterns introduced by the change just
       happened to expose an old bug, and people had grown to depend on the
       previously benign behavior of that old issue.

       And never fear, we'll re-introduce the fix that improved on the IO
       patterns once we've decided just how to handle the fact that we had a
       bad interaction with an interface that people had then just happened
       to rely on incidental behavior for before. It's just that we'll have
       to hash through how to do that (there are no less than three different
       patches by three different developers being discussed, and there might
       be more coming...). In the meantime, I reverted the thing that exposed
       the problem to users for this release, even if I hope it will be
       re-introduced (perhaps even backported as a stable patch) once we have
       consensus about the issue it exposed.

       Take-away from the whole thing: it's not about whether you change the
       kernel-userspace ABI, or fix a bug, or about whether the old code
       "should never have worked in the first place". It's about whether
       something breaks existing users' workflow.

       Anyway, that was my little aside on the whole regression thing.  Since
       it's that "first rule of kernel programming", I felt it is perhaps
       worth just bringing it up every once in a while

..
   end-of-content
..
   This text is available under GPL-2.0+ or CC-BY-4.0, as stated at the top
   of the file. If you want to distribute this text under CC-BY-4.0 only,
   please use "The Linux kernel developers" for author attribution and link
   this as source:
   https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/plain/Documentation/process/handling-regressions.rst
..
   Note: Only the content of this RST file as found in the Linux kernel sources
   is available under CC-BY-4.0, as versions of this text that were processed
   (for example by the kernel's build system) might contain content taken from
   files which use a more restrictive license.
.. _process_howto:

HOWTO do Linux kernel development
=================================

This is the be-all, end-all document on this topic.  It contains
instructions on how to become a Linux kernel developer and how to learn
to work with the Linux kernel development community.  It tries to not
contain anything related to the technical aspects of kernel programming,
but will help point you in the right direction for that.

If anything in this document becomes out of date, please send in patches
to the maintainer of this file, who is listed at the bottom of the
document.


Introduction
------------

So, you want to learn how to become a Linux kernel developer?  Or you
have been told by your manager, "Go write a Linux driver for this
device."  This document's goal is to teach you everything you need to
know to achieve this by describing the process you need to go through,
and hints on how to work with the community.  It will also try to
explain some of the reasons why the community works like it does.

The kernel is written mostly in C, with some architecture-dependent
parts written in assembly. A good understanding of C is required for
kernel development.  Assembly (any architecture) is not required unless
you plan to do low-level development for that architecture.  Though they
are not a good substitute for a solid C education and/or years of
experience, the following books are good for, if anything, reference:

 - "The C Programming Language" by Kernighan and Ritchie [Prentice Hall]
 - "Practical C Programming" by Steve Oualline [O'Reilly]
 - "C:  A Reference Manual" by Harbison and Steele [Prentice Hall]

The kernel is written using GNU C and the GNU toolchain.  While it
adheres to the ISO C11 standard, it uses a number of extensions that are
not featured in the standard.  The kernel is a freestanding C
environment, with no reliance on the standard C library, so some
portions of the C standard are not supported.  Arbitrary long long
divisions and floating point are not allowed.  It can sometimes be
difficult to understand the assumptions the kernel has on the toolchain
and the extensions that it uses, and unfortunately there is no
definitive reference for them.  Please check the gcc info pages (`info
gcc`) for some information on them.

Please remember that you are trying to learn how to work with the
existing development community.  It is a diverse group of people, with
high standards for coding, style and procedure.  These standards have
been created over time based on what they have found to work best for
such a large and geographically dispersed team.  Try to learn as much as
possible about these standards ahead of time, as they are well
documented; do not expect people to adapt to you or your company's way
of doing things.


Legal Issues
------------

The Linux kernel source code is released under the GPL.  Please see the file
COPYING in the main directory of the source tree. The Linux kernel licensing
rules and how to use `SPDX <https://spdx.org/>`_ identifiers in source code are
described in :ref:`Documentation/process/license-rules.rst <kernel_licensing>`.
If you have further questions about the license, please contact a lawyer, and do
not ask on the Linux kernel mailing list.  The people on the mailing lists are
not lawyers, and you should not rely on their statements on legal matters.

For common questions and answers about the GPL, please see:

	https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html


Documentation
-------------

The Linux kernel source tree has a large range of documents that are
invaluable for learning how to interact with the kernel community.  When
new features are added to the kernel, it is recommended that new
documentation files are also added which explain how to use the feature.
When a kernel change causes the interface that the kernel exposes to
userspace to change, it is recommended that you send the information or
a patch to the manual pages explaining the change to the manual pages
maintainer at alx@kernel.org, and CC the list linux-api@vger.kernel.org.

Here is a list of files that are in the kernel source tree that are
required reading:

  :ref:`Documentation/admin-guide/README.rst <readme>`
    This file gives a short background on the Linux kernel and describes
    what is necessary to do to configure and build the kernel.  People
    who are new to the kernel should start here.

  :ref:`Documentation/process/changes.rst <changes>`
    This file gives a list of the minimum levels of various software
    packages that are necessary to build and run the kernel
    successfully.

  :ref:`Documentation/process/coding-style.rst <codingstyle>`
    This describes the Linux kernel coding style, and some of the
    rationale behind it. All new code is expected to follow the
    guidelines in this document. Most maintainers will only accept
    patches if these rules are followed, and many people will only
    review code if it is in the proper style.

  :ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`
    This file describes in explicit detail how to successfully create
    and send a patch, including (but not limited to):

       - Email contents
       - Email format
       - Who to send it to

    Following these rules will not guarantee success (as all patches are
    subject to scrutiny for content and style), but not following them
    will almost always prevent it.

    Other excellent descriptions of how to create patches properly are:

	"The Perfect Patch"
		https://www.ozlabs.org/~akpm/stuff/tpp.txt

	"Linux kernel patch submission format"
		https://web.archive.org/web/20180829112450/http://linux.yyz.us/patch-format.html

  :ref:`Documentation/process/stable-api-nonsense.rst <stable_api_nonsense>`
    This file describes the rationale behind the conscious decision to
    not have a stable API within the kernel, including things like:

      - Subsystem shim-layers (for compatibility?)
      - Driver portability between Operating Systems.
      - Mitigating rapid change within the kernel source tree (or
	preventing rapid change)

    This document is crucial for understanding the Linux development
    philosophy and is very important for people moving to Linux from
    development on other Operating Systems.

  :ref:`Documentation/process/security-bugs.rst <securitybugs>`
    If you feel you have found a security problem in the Linux kernel,
    please follow the steps in this document to help notify the kernel
    developers, and help solve the issue.

  :ref:`Documentation/process/management-style.rst <managementstyle>`
    This document describes how Linux kernel maintainers operate and the
    shared ethos behind their methodologies.  This is important reading
    for anyone new to kernel development (or anyone simply curious about
    it), as it resolves a lot of common misconceptions and confusion
    about the unique behavior of kernel maintainers.

  :ref:`Documentation/process/stable-kernel-rules.rst <stable_kernel_rules>`
    This file describes the rules on how the stable kernel releases
    happen, and what to do if you want to get a change into one of these
    releases.

  :ref:`Documentation/process/kernel-docs.rst <kernel_docs>`
    A list of external documentation that pertains to kernel
    development.  Please consult this list if you do not find what you
    are looking for within the in-kernel documentation.

  :ref:`Documentation/process/applying-patches.rst <applying_patches>`
    A good introduction describing exactly what a patch is and how to
    apply it to the different development branches of the kernel.

The kernel also has a large number of documents that can be
automatically generated from the source code itself or from
ReStructuredText markups (ReST), like this one. This includes a
full description of the in-kernel API, and rules on how to handle
locking properly.

All such documents can be generated as PDF or HTML by running::

	make pdfdocs
	make htmldocs

respectively from the main kernel source directory.

The documents that uses ReST markup will be generated at Documentation/output.
They can also be generated on LaTeX and ePub formats with::

	make latexdocs
	make epubdocs

Becoming A Kernel Developer
---------------------------

If you do not know anything about Linux kernel development, you should
look at the Linux KernelNewbies project:

	https://kernelnewbies.org

It consists of a helpful mailing list where you can ask almost any type
of basic kernel development question (make sure to search the archives
first, before asking something that has already been answered in the
past.)  It also has an IRC channel that you can use to ask questions in
real-time, and a lot of helpful documentation that is useful for
learning about Linux kernel development.

The website has basic information about code organization, subsystems,
and current projects (both in-tree and out-of-tree). It also describes
some basic logistical information, like how to compile a kernel and
apply a patch.

If you do not know where you want to start, but you want to look for
some task to start doing to join into the kernel development community,
go to the Linux Kernel Janitor's project:

	https://kernelnewbies.org/KernelJanitors

It is a great place to start.  It describes a list of relatively simple
problems that need to be cleaned up and fixed within the Linux kernel
source tree.  Working with the developers in charge of this project, you
will learn the basics of getting your patch into the Linux kernel tree,
and possibly be pointed in the direction of what to go work on next, if
you do not already have an idea.

Before making any actual modifications to the Linux kernel code, it is
imperative to understand how the code in question works.  For this
purpose, nothing is better than reading through it directly (most tricky
bits are commented well), perhaps even with the help of specialized
tools.  One such tool that is particularly recommended is the Linux
Cross-Reference project, which is able to present source code in a
self-referential, indexed webpage format. An excellent up-to-date
repository of the kernel code may be found at:

	https://elixir.bootlin.com/


The development process
-----------------------

Linux kernel development process currently consists of a few different
main kernel "branches" and lots of different subsystem-specific kernel
branches.  These different branches are:

  - Linus's mainline tree
  - Various stable trees with multiple major numbers
  - Subsystem-specific trees
  - linux-next integration testing tree

Mainline tree
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The mainline tree is maintained by Linus Torvalds, and can be found at
https://kernel.org or in the repo.  Its development process is as follows:

  - As soon as a new kernel is released a two week window is open,
    during this period of time maintainers can submit big diffs to
    Linus, usually the patches that have already been included in the
    linux-next for a few weeks.  The preferred way to submit big changes
    is using git (the kernel's source management tool, more information
    can be found at https://git-scm.com/) but plain patches are also just
    fine.
  - After two weeks a -rc1 kernel is released and the focus is on making the
    new kernel as rock solid as possible.  Most of the patches at this point
    should fix a regression.  Bugs that have always existed are not
    regressions, so only push these kinds of fixes if they are important.
    Please note that a whole new driver (or filesystem) might be accepted
    after -rc1 because there is no risk of causing regressions with such a
    change as long as the change is self-contained and does not affect areas
    outside of the code that is being added.  git can be used to send
    patches to Linus after -rc1 is released, but the patches need to also be
    sent to a public mailing list for review.
  - A new -rc is released whenever Linus deems the current git tree to
    be in a reasonably sane state adequate for testing.  The goal is to
    release a new -rc kernel every week.
  - Process continues until the kernel is considered "ready", the
    process should last around 6 weeks.

It is worth mentioning what Andrew Morton wrote on the linux-kernel
mailing list about kernel releases:

	*"Nobody knows when a kernel will be released, because it's
	released according to perceived bug status, not according to a
	preconceived timeline."*

Various stable trees with multiple major numbers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Kernels with 3-part versions are -stable kernels. They contain
relatively small and critical fixes for security problems or significant
regressions discovered in a given major mainline release. Each release
in a major stable series increments the third part of the version
number, keeping the first two parts the same.

This is the recommended branch for users who want the most recent stable
kernel and are not interested in helping test development/experimental
versions.

Stable trees are maintained by the "stable" team <stable@vger.kernel.org>, and
are released as needs dictate.  The normal release period is approximately
two weeks, but it can be longer if there are no pressing problems.  A
security-related problem, instead, can cause a release to happen almost
instantly.

The file :ref:`Documentation/process/stable-kernel-rules.rst <stable_kernel_rules>`
in the kernel tree documents what kinds of changes are acceptable for
the -stable tree, and how the release process works.

Subsystem-specific trees
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The maintainers of the various kernel subsystems --- and also many
kernel subsystem developers --- expose their current state of
development in source repositories.  That way, others can see what is
happening in the different areas of the kernel.  In areas where
development is rapid, a developer may be asked to base his submissions
onto such a subsystem kernel tree so that conflicts between the
submission and other already ongoing work are avoided.

Most of these repositories are git trees, but there are also other SCMs
in use, or patch queues being published as quilt series.  Addresses of
these subsystem repositories are listed in the MAINTAINERS file.  Many
of them can be browsed at https://git.kernel.org/.

Before a proposed patch is committed to such a subsystem tree, it is
subject to review which primarily happens on mailing lists (see the
respective section below).  For several kernel subsystems, this review
process is tracked with the tool patchwork.  Patchwork offers a web
interface which shows patch postings, any comments on a patch or
revisions to it, and maintainers can mark patches as under review,
accepted, or rejected.  Most of these patchwork sites are listed at
https://patchwork.kernel.org/.

linux-next integration testing tree
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before updates from subsystem trees are merged into the mainline tree,
they need to be integration-tested.  For this purpose, a special
testing repository exists into which virtually all subsystem trees are
pulled on an almost daily basis:

	https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/next/linux-next.git

This way, the linux-next gives a summary outlook onto what will be
expected to go into the mainline kernel at the next merge period.
Adventurous testers are very welcome to runtime-test the linux-next.


Bug Reporting
-------------

The file 'Documentation/admin-guide/reporting-issues.rst' in the main kernel
source directory describes how to report a possible kernel bug, and details
what kind of information is needed by the kernel developers to help track
down the problem.


Managing bug reports
--------------------

One of the best ways to put into practice your hacking skills is by fixing
bugs reported by other people. Not only will you help to make the kernel
more stable, but you'll also learn to fix real-world problems and you will
improve your skills, and other developers will be aware of your presence.
Fixing bugs is one of the best ways to get merits among other developers,
because not many people like wasting time fixing other people's bugs.

To work on already reported bug reports, find a subsystem you are interested in.
Check the MAINTAINERS file where bugs for that subsystem get reported to; often
it will be a mailing list, rarely a bugtracker. Search the archives of said
place for recent reports and help where you see fit. You may also want to check
https://bugzilla.kernel.org for bug reports; only a handful of kernel subsystems
use it actively for reporting or tracking, nevertheless bugs for the whole
kernel get filed there.


Mailing lists
-------------

As some of the above documents describe, the majority of the core kernel
developers participate on the Linux Kernel Mailing list.  Details on how
to subscribe and unsubscribe from the list can be found at:

	https://subspace.kernel.org/subscribing.html

There are archives of the mailing list on the web in many different
places.  Use a search engine to find these archives.  For example:

	https://lore.kernel.org/linux-kernel/

It is highly recommended that you search the archives about the topic
you want to bring up, before you post it to the list. A lot of things
already discussed in detail are only recorded at the mailing list
archives.

Most of the individual kernel subsystems also have their own separate
mailing list where they do their development efforts.  See the
MAINTAINERS file for a list of what these lists are for the different
groups.

Many of the lists are hosted on kernel.org. Information on them can be
found at:

	https://subspace.kernel.org

Please remember to follow good behavioral habits when using the lists.
Though a bit cheesy, the following URL has some simple guidelines for
interacting with the list (or any list):

	https://subspace.kernel.org/etiquette.html

If multiple people respond to your mail, the CC: list of recipients may
get pretty large. Don't remove anybody from the CC: list without a good
reason, or don't reply only to the list address. Get used to receiving the
mail twice, one from the sender and the one from the list, and don't try
to tune that by adding fancy mail-headers, people will not like it.

Remember to keep the context and the attribution of your replies intact,
keep the "John Kernelhacker wrote ...:" lines at the top of your reply, and
add your statements between the individual quoted sections instead of
writing at the top of the mail.

If you add patches to your mail, make sure they are plain readable text
as stated in :ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`.
Kernel developers don't want to deal with
attachments or compressed patches; they may want to comment on
individual lines of your patch, which works only that way. Make sure you
use a mail program that does not mangle spaces and tab characters. A
good first test is to send the mail to yourself and try to apply your
own patch by yourself. If that doesn't work, get your mail program fixed
or change it until it works.

Above all, please remember to show respect to other subscribers.


Working with the community
--------------------------

The goal of the kernel community is to provide the best possible kernel
there is.  When you submit a patch for acceptance, it will be reviewed
on its technical merits and those alone.  So, what should you be
expecting?

  - criticism
  - comments
  - requests for change
  - requests for justification
  - silence

Remember, this is part of getting your patch into the kernel.  You have
to be able to take criticism and comments about your patches, evaluate
them at a technical level and either rework your patches or provide
clear and concise reasoning as to why those changes should not be made.
If there are no responses to your posting, wait a few days and try
again, sometimes things get lost in the huge volume.

What should you not do?

  - expect your patch to be accepted without question
  - become defensive
  - ignore comments
  - resubmit the patch without making any of the requested changes

In a community that is looking for the best technical solution possible,
there will always be differing opinions on how beneficial a patch is.
You have to be cooperative, and willing to adapt your idea to fit within
the kernel.  Or at least be willing to prove your idea is worth it.
Remember, being wrong is acceptable as long as you are willing to work
toward a solution that is right.

It is normal that the answers to your first patch might simply be a list
of a dozen things you should correct.  This does **not** imply that your
patch will not be accepted, and it is **not** meant against you
personally.  Simply correct all issues raised against your patch and
resend it.


Differences between the kernel community and corporate structures
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The kernel community works differently than most traditional corporate
development environments.  Here are a list of things that you can try to
do to avoid problems:

  Good things to say regarding your proposed changes:

    - "This solves multiple problems."
    - "This deletes 2000 lines of code."
    - "Here is a patch that explains what I am trying to describe."
    - "I tested it on 5 different architectures..."
    - "Here is a series of small patches that..."
    - "This increases performance on typical machines..."

  Bad things you should avoid saying:

    - "We did it this way in AIX/ptx/Solaris, so therefore it must be
      good..."
    - "I've being doing this for 20 years, so..."
    - "This is required for my company to make money"
    - "This is for our Enterprise product line."
    - "Here is my 1000 page design document that describes my idea"
    - "I've been working on this for 6 months..."
    - "Here's a 5000 line patch that..."
    - "I rewrote all of the current mess, and here it is..."
    - "I have a deadline, and this patch needs to be applied now."

Another way the kernel community is different than most traditional
software engineering work environments is the faceless nature of
interaction.  One benefit of using email and irc as the primary forms of
communication is the lack of discrimination based on gender or race.
The Linux kernel work environment is accepting of women and minorities
because all you are is an email address.  The international aspect also
helps to level the playing field because you can't guess gender based on
a person's name. A man may be named Andrea and a woman may be named Pat.
Most women who have worked in the Linux kernel and have expressed an
opinion have had positive experiences.

The language barrier can cause problems for some people who are not
comfortable with English.  A good grasp of the language can be needed in
order to get ideas across properly on mailing lists, so it is
recommended that you check your emails to make sure they make sense in
English before sending them.


Break up your changes
---------------------

The Linux kernel community does not gladly accept large chunks of code
dropped on it all at once.  The changes need to be properly introduced,
discussed, and broken up into tiny, individual portions.  This is almost
the exact opposite of what companies are used to doing.  Your proposal
should also be introduced very early in the development process, so that
you can receive feedback on what you are doing.  It also lets the
community feel that you are working with them, and not simply using them
as a dumping ground for your feature.  However, don't send 50 emails at
one time to a mailing list, your patch series should be smaller than
that almost all of the time.

The reasons for breaking things up are the following:

1) Small patches increase the likelihood that your patches will be
   applied, since they don't take much time or effort to verify for
   correctness.  A 5 line patch can be applied by a maintainer with
   barely a second glance. However, a 500 line patch may take hours to
   review for correctness (the time it takes is exponentially
   proportional to the size of the patch, or something).

   Small patches also make it very easy to debug when something goes
   wrong.  It's much easier to back out patches one by one than it is
   to dissect a very large patch after it's been applied (and broken
   something).

2) It's important not only to send small patches, but also to rewrite
   and simplify (or simply re-order) patches before submitting them.

Here is an analogy from kernel developer Al Viro:

	*"Think of a teacher grading homework from a math student.  The
	teacher does not want to see the student's trials and errors
	before they came up with the solution. They want to see the
	cleanest, most elegant answer.  A good student knows this, and
	would never submit her intermediate work before the final
	solution.*

	*The same is true of kernel development. The maintainers and
	reviewers do not want to see the thought process behind the
	solution to the problem one is solving. They want to see a
	simple and elegant solution."*

It may be challenging to keep the balance between presenting an elegant
solution and working together with the community and discussing your
unfinished work. Therefore it is good to get early in the process to
get feedback to improve your work, but also keep your changes in small
chunks that they may get already accepted, even when your whole task is
not ready for inclusion now.

Also realize that it is not acceptable to send patches for inclusion
that are unfinished and will be "fixed up later."


Justify your change
-------------------

Along with breaking up your patches, it is very important for you to let
the Linux community know why they should add this change.  New features
must be justified as being needed and useful.


Document your change
--------------------

When sending in your patches, pay special attention to what you say in
the text in your email.  This information will become the ChangeLog
information for the patch, and will be preserved for everyone to see for
all time.  It should describe the patch completely, containing:

  - why the change is necessary
  - the overall design approach in the patch
  - implementation details
  - testing results

For more details on what this should all look like, please see the
ChangeLog section of the document:

  "The Perfect Patch"
      https://www.ozlabs.org/~akpm/stuff/tpp.txt


All of these things are sometimes very hard to do. It can take years to
perfect these practices (if at all). It's a continuous process of
improvement that requires a lot of patience and determination. But
don't give up, it's possible. Many have done it before, and each had to
start exactly where you are now.




----------

Thanks to Paolo Ciarrocchi who allowed the "Development Process"
(https://lwn.net/Articles/94386/) section
to be based on text he had written, and to Randy Dunlap and Gerrit
Huizenga for some of the list of things you should and should not say.
Also thanks to Pat Mochel, Hanna Linder, Randy Dunlap, Kay Sievers,
Vojtech Pavlik, Jan Kara, Josh Boyer, Kees Cook, Andrew Morton, Andi
Kleen, Vadim Lobanov, Jesper Juhl, Adrian Bunk, Keri Harris, Frans Pop,
David A. Wheeler, Junio Hamano, Michael Kerrisk, and Alex Shepard for
their review, comments, and contributions.  Without their help, this
document would not have been possible.



Maintainer: Greg Kroah-Hartman <greg@kroah.com>
.. raw:: latex

	\renewcommand\thesection*
	\renewcommand\thesubsection*

.. _process_index:

=============================================
Working with the kernel development community
=============================================

So you want to be a Linux kernel developer?  Welcome!  While there is a lot
to be learned about the kernel in a technical sense, it is also important
to learn about how our community works.  Reading these documents will make
it much easier for you to get your changes merged with a minimum of
trouble.

An introduction to how kernel development works
-----------------------------------------------

Read these documents first: an understanding of the material here will ease
your entry into the kernel community.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   howto
   development-process
   submitting-patches
   submit-checklist

Tools and technical guides for kernel developers
------------------------------------------------

This is a collection of material that kernel developers should be familiar
with.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   changes
   programming-language
   coding-style
   maintainer-pgp-guide
   email-clients
   applying-patches
   backporting
   adding-syscalls
   volatile-considered-harmful
   botching-up-ioctls

Policy guides and developer statements
--------------------------------------

These are the rules that we try to live by in the kernel community (and
beyond).

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   license-rules
   code-of-conduct
   code-of-conduct-interpretation
   contribution-maturity-model
   kernel-enforcement-statement
   kernel-driver-statement
   stable-api-nonsense
   stable-kernel-rules
   management-style
   researcher-guidelines

Dealing with bugs
-----------------

Bugs are a fact of life; it is important that we handle them properly.
The documents below describe our policies around the handling of a couple
of special classes of bugs: regressions and security problems.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   handling-regressions
   security-bugs
   cve
   embargoed-hardware-issues

Maintainer information
----------------------

How to find the people who will accept your patches.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   maintainer-handbooks
   maintainers

Other material
--------------

Here are some other guides to the community that are of interest to most
developers:

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   kernel-docs
   deprecated

.. only::  subproject and html

   Indices
   =======

   * :ref:`genindex`
.. _kernel_docs:

Index of Further Kernel Documentation
=====================================

The need for a document like this one became apparent in the linux-kernel
mailing list as the same questions, asking for pointers to information,
appeared again and again.

Fortunately, as more and more people get to GNU/Linux, more and more get
interested in the Kernel. But reading the sources is not always enough. It
is easy to understand the code, but miss the concepts, the philosophy and
design decisions behind this code.

Unfortunately, not many documents are available for beginners to start.
And, even if they exist, there was no "well-known" place which kept track
of them. These lines try to cover this lack.

PLEASE, if you know any paper not listed here or write a new document,
include a reference to it here, following the kernel's patch submission
process. Any corrections, ideas or comments are also welcome.

All documents are cataloged with the following fields: the document's
"Title", the "Author"/s, the "URL" where they can be found, some "Keywords"
helpful when searching for specific topics, and a brief "Description" of
the Document.

.. note::

   The documents on each section of this document are ordered by its
   published date, from the newest to the oldest. The maintainer(s) should
   periodically retire resources as they become obsolete or outdated; with
   the exception of foundational books.

Docs at the Linux Kernel tree
-----------------------------

The Sphinx books should be built with ``make {htmldocs | pdfdocs | epubdocs}``.

    * Name: **linux/Documentation**

      :Author: Many.
      :Location: Documentation/
      :Keywords: text files, Sphinx.
      :Description: Documentation that comes with the kernel sources,
        inside the Documentation directory. Some pages from this document
        (including this document itself) have been moved there, and might
        be more up to date than the web version.

On-line docs
------------

    * Title: **Linux Kernel Mailing List Glossary**

      :Author: various
      :URL: https://kernelnewbies.org/KernelGlossary
      :Date: rolling version
      :Keywords: glossary, terms, linux-kernel.
      :Description: From the introduction: "This glossary is intended as
        a brief description of some of the acronyms and terms you may hear
        during discussion of the Linux kernel".

    * Title: **The Linux Kernel Module Programming Guide**

      :Author: Peter Jay Salzman, Michael Burian, Ori Pomerantz, Bob Mottram,
        Jim Huang.
      :URL: https://sysprog21.github.io/lkmpg/
      :Date: 2021
      :Keywords: modules, GPL book, /proc, ioctls, system calls,
        interrupt handlers .
      :Description: A very nice GPL book on the topic of modules
        programming. Lots of examples. Currently the new version is being
        actively maintained at https://github.com/sysprog21/lkmpg.

    * Title: **Rust for Linux**

      :Author: various
      :URL: https://rust-for-linux.com/
      :Date: rolling version
      :Keywords: glossary, terms, linux-kernel.
      :Description: From the website: "Rust for Linux is the project adding
        support for the Rust language to the Linux kernel. This website is
        intended as a hub of links, documentation and resources related to
        the project".

Published books
---------------

    * Title: **Practical Linux System Administration: A Guide to Installation, Configuration, and Management, 1st Edition**

      :Author: Kenneth Hess
      :Publisher: O'Reilly Media
      :Date: May, 2023
      :Pages: 246
      :ISBN: 978-1098109035
      :Notes: System administration

    * Title: **Linux Kernel Debugging: Leverage proven tools and advanced techniques to effectively debug Linux kernels and kernel modules**

      :Author: Kaiwan N Billimoria
      :Publisher: Packt Publishing Ltd
      :Date: August, 2022
      :Pages: 638
      :ISBN: 978-1801075039
      :Notes: Debugging book

    * Title: **Linux Kernel Programming: A Comprehensive Guide to Kernel Internals, Writing Kernel Modules, and Kernel Synchronization**

      :Author: Kaiwan N Billimoria
      :Publisher: Packt Publishing Ltd
      :Date: March, 2021 (Second Edition published in 2024)
      :Pages: 754
      :ISBN: 978-1789953435 (Second Edition ISBN is 978-1803232225)

    * Title: **Linux Kernel Programming Part 2 - Char Device Drivers and Kernel Synchronization: Create user-kernel interfaces, work with peripheral I/O, and handle hardware interrupts**

      :Author: Kaiwan N Billimoria
      :Publisher: Packt Publishing Ltd
      :Date: March, 2021
      :Pages: 452
      :ISBN: 978-1801079518

    * Title: **Linux System Programming: Talking Directly to the Kernel and C Library**

      :Author: Robert Love
      :Publisher: O'Reilly Media
      :Date: June, 2013
      :Pages: 456
      :ISBN: 978-1449339531
      :Notes: Foundational book

    * Title: **Linux Kernel Development, 3rd Edition**

      :Author: Robert Love
      :Publisher: Addison-Wesley
      :Date: July, 2010
      :Pages: 440
      :ISBN: 978-0672329463
      :Notes: Foundational book

.. _ldd3_published:

    * Title: **Linux Device Drivers, 3rd Edition**

      :Authors: Jonathan Corbet, Alessandro Rubini, and Greg Kroah-Hartman
      :Publisher: O'Reilly & Associates
      :Date: 2005
      :Pages: 636
      :ISBN: 0-596-00590-3
      :Notes: Foundational book. Further information in
        http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/linuxdrive3/
        PDF format, URL: https://lwn.net/Kernel/LDD3/

    * Title: **The Design of the UNIX Operating System**

      :Author: Maurice J. Bach
      :Publisher: Prentice Hall
      :Date: 1986
      :Pages: 471
      :ISBN: 0-13-201757-1
      :Notes: Foundational book

Miscellaneous
-------------

    * Name: **Cross-Referencing Linux**

      :URL: https://elixir.bootlin.com/
      :Keywords: Browsing source code.
      :Description: Another web-based Linux kernel source code browser.
        Lots of cross references to variables and functions. You can see
        where they are defined and where they are used.

    * Name: **Linux Weekly News**

      :URL: https://lwn.net
      :Keywords: latest kernel news.
      :Description: The title says it all. There's a fixed kernel section
        summarizing developers' work, bug fixes, new features and versions
        produced during the week.

    * Name: **The home page of Linux-MM**

      :Author: The Linux-MM team.
      :URL: https://linux-mm.org/
      :Keywords: memory management, Linux-MM, mm patches, TODO, docs,
        mailing list.
      :Description: Site devoted to Linux Memory Management development.
        Memory related patches, HOWTOs, links, mm developers... Don't miss
        it if you are interested in memory management development!

    * Name: **Kernel Newbies IRC Channel and Website**

      :URL: https://www.kernelnewbies.org
      :Keywords: IRC, newbies, channel, asking doubts.
      :Description: #kernelnewbies on irc.oftc.net.
        #kernelnewbies is an IRC network dedicated to the 'newbie'
        kernel hacker. The audience mostly consists of people who are
        learning about the kernel, working on kernel projects or
        professional kernel hackers that want to help less seasoned kernel
        people.
        #kernelnewbies is on the OFTC IRC Network.
        Try irc.oftc.net as your server and then /join #kernelnewbies.
        The kernelnewbies website also hosts articles, documents, FAQs...

    * Name: **linux-kernel mailing list archives and search engines**

      :URL: https://subspace.kernel.org
      :URL: https://lore.kernel.org
      :Keywords: linux-kernel, archives, search.
      :Description: Some of the linux-kernel mailing list archivers. If
        you have a better/another one, please let me know.

    * Name: **The Linux Foundation YouTube channel**

      :URL: https://www.youtube.com/user/thelinuxfoundation
      :Keywords: linux, videos, linux-foundation, youtube.
      :Description: The Linux Foundation uploads video recordings of their
        collaborative events, Linux conferences including LinuxCon, and
        other original research and content related to Linux and software
        development.

-------

This document was originally based on:

 https://www.dit.upm.es/~jmseyas/linux/kernel/hackers-docs.html

and written by Juan-Mariano de Goyeneche
.. _process_statement_driver:

Kernel Driver Statement
-----------------------

Position Statement on Linux Kernel Modules
==========================================


We, the undersigned Linux kernel developers, consider any closed-source
Linux kernel module or driver to be harmful and undesirable. We have
repeatedly found them to be detrimental to Linux users, businesses, and
the greater Linux ecosystem. Such modules negate the openness,
stability, flexibility, and maintainability of the Linux development
model and shut their users off from the expertise of the Linux
community. Vendors that provide closed-source kernel modules force their
customers to give up key Linux advantages or choose new vendors.
Therefore, in order to take full advantage of the cost savings and
shared support benefits open source has to offer, we urge vendors to
adopt a policy of supporting their customers on Linux with open-source
kernel code.

We speak only for ourselves, and not for any company we might work for
today, have in the past, or will in the future.

 - Dave Airlie
 - Nick Andrew
 - Jens Axboe
 - Ralf Baechle
 - Felipe Balbi
 - Ohad Ben-Cohen
 - Muli Ben-Yehuda
 - Jiri Benc
 - Arnd Bergmann
 - Thomas Bogendoerfer
 - Vitaly Bordug
 - James Bottomley
 - Josh Boyer
 - Neil Brown
 - Mark Brown
 - David Brownell
 - Michael Buesch
 - Franck Bui-Huu
 - Adrian Bunk
 - François Cami
 - Ralph Campbell
 - Luiz Fernando N. Capitulino
 - Mauro Carvalho Chehab
 - Denis Cheng
 - Jonathan Corbet
 - Glauber Costa
 - Alan Cox
 - Magnus Damm
 - Ahmed S. Darwish
 - Robert P. J. Day
 - Hans de Goede
 - Arnaldo Carvalho de Melo
 - Helge Deller
 - Jean Delvare
 - Mathieu Desnoyers
 - Sven-Thorsten Dietrich
 - Alexey Dobriyan
 - Daniel Drake
 - Alex Dubov
 - Randy Dunlap
 - Michael Ellerman
 - Pekka Enberg
 - Jan Engelhardt
 - Mark Fasheh
 - J. Bruce Fields
 - Larry Finger
 - Jeremy Fitzhardinge
 - Mike Frysinger
 - Kumar Gala
 - Robin Getz
 - Liam Girdwood
 - Jan-Benedict Glaw
 - Thomas Gleixner
 - Brice Goglin
 - Cyrill Gorcunov
 - Andy Gospodarek
 - Thomas Graf
 - Krzysztof Halasa
 - Harvey Harrison
 - Stephen Hemminger
 - Michael Hennerich
 - Tejun Heo
 - Benjamin Herrenschmidt
 - Kristian Høgsberg
 - Henrique de Moraes Holschuh
 - Marcel Holtmann
 - Mike Isely
 - Takashi Iwai
 - Olof Johansson
 - Dave Jones
 - Jesper Juhl
 - Matthias Kaehlcke
 - Kenji Kaneshige
 - Jan Kara
 - Jeremy Kerr
 - Russell King
 - Olaf Kirch
 - Roel Kluin
 - Hans-Jürgen Koch
 - Auke Kok
 - Peter Korsgaard
 - Jiri Kosina
 - Aaro Koskinen
 - Mariusz Kozlowski
 - Greg Kroah-Hartman
 - Michael Krufky
 - Aneesh Kumar
 - Clemens Ladisch
 - Christoph Lameter
 - Gunnar Larisch
 - Anders Larsen
 - Grant Likely
 - John W. Linville
 - Yinghai Lu
 - Tony Luck
 - Pavel Machek
 - Matt Mackall
 - Paul Mackerras
 - Roland McGrath
 - Patrick McHardy
 - Kyle McMartin
 - Paul Menage
 - Thierry Merle
 - Eric Miao
 - Akinobu Mita
 - Ingo Molnar
 - James Morris
 - Andrew Morton
 - Paul Mundt
 - Oleg Nesterov
 - Luca Olivetti
 - S.Çağlar Onur
 - Pierre Ossman
 - Keith Owens
 - Venkatesh Pallipadi
 - Nick Piggin
 - Nicolas Pitre
 - Evgeniy Polyakov
 - Richard Purdie
 - Mike Rapoport
 - Sam Ravnborg
 - Gerrit Renker
 - Stefan Richter
 - David Rientjes
 - Luis R. Rodriguez
 - Stefan Roese
 - Francois Romieu
 - Rami Rosen
 - Stephen Rothwell
 - Maciej W. Rozycki
 - Mark Salyzyn
 - Yoshinori Sato
 - Deepak Saxena
 - Holger Schurig
 - Amit Shah
 - Yoshihiro Shimoda
 - Sergei Shtylyov
 - Kay Sievers
 - Sebastian Siewior
 - Rik Snel
 - Jes Sorensen
 - Alexey Starikovskiy
 - Alan Stern
 - Timur Tabi
 - Hirokazu Takata
 - Eliezer Tamir
 - Eugene Teo
 - Doug Thompson
 - FUJITA Tomonori
 - Dmitry Torokhov
 - Marcelo Tosatti
 - Steven Toth
 - Theodore Tso
 - Matthias Urlichs
 - Geert Uytterhoeven
 - Arjan van de Ven
 - Ivo van Doorn
 - Rik van Riel
 - Wim Van Sebroeck
 - Hans Verkuil
 - Horst H. von Brand
 - Dmitri Vorobiev
 - Anton Vorontsov
 - Daniel Walker
 - Johannes Weiner
 - Harald Welte
 - Matthew Wilcox
 - Dan J. Williams
 - Darrick J. Wong
 - David Woodhouse
 - Chris Wright
 - Bryan Wu
 - Rafael J. Wysocki
 - Herbert Xu
 - Vlad Yasevich
 - Peter Zijlstra
 - Bartlomiej Zolnierkiewicz
.. _process_statement_kernel:

Linux Kernel Enforcement Statement
----------------------------------

As developers of the Linux kernel, we have a keen interest in how our software
is used and how the license for our software is enforced.  Compliance with the
reciprocal sharing obligations of GPL-2.0 is critical to the long-term
sustainability of our software and community.

Although there is a right to enforce the separate copyright interests in the
contributions made to our community, we share an interest in ensuring that
individual enforcement actions are conducted in a manner that benefits our
community and do not have an unintended negative impact on the health and
growth of our software ecosystem.  In order to deter unhelpful enforcement
actions, we agree that it is in the best interests of our development
community to undertake the following commitment to users of the Linux kernel
on behalf of ourselves and any successors to our copyright interests:

    Notwithstanding the termination provisions of the GPL-2.0, we agree that
    it is in the best interests of our development community to adopt the
    following provisions of GPL-3.0 as additional permissions under our
    license with respect to any non-defensive assertion of rights under the
    license.

	However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your license
	from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a) provisionally,
	unless and until the copyright holder explicitly and finally
	terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright holder
	fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means prior to
	60 days after the cessation.

	Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is
	reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of the
	violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have
	received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from that
	copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after
	your receipt of the notice.

Our intent in providing these assurances is to encourage more use of the
software.  We want companies and individuals to use, modify and distribute
this software.  We want to work with users in an open and transparent way to
eliminate any uncertainty about our expectations regarding compliance or
enforcement that might limit adoption of our software.  We view legal action
as a last resort, to be initiated only when other community efforts have
failed to resolve the problem.

Finally, once a non-compliance issue is resolved, we hope the user will feel
welcome to join us in our efforts on this project.  Working together, we will
be stronger.

Except where noted below, we speak only for ourselves, and not for any company
we might work for today, have in the past, or will in the future.

  - Laura Abbott
  - Bjorn Andersson (Linaro)
  - Andrea Arcangeli
  - Neil Armstrong
  - Jens Axboe
  - Pablo Neira Ayuso
  - Khalid Aziz
  - Ralf Baechle
  - Felipe Balbi
  - Arnd Bergmann
  - Ard Biesheuvel
  - Tim Bird
  - Paolo Bonzini
  - Christian Borntraeger
  - Mark Brown (Linaro)
  - Paul Burton
  - Javier Martinez Canillas
  - Rob Clark
  - Kees Cook (Google)
  - Jonathan Corbet
  - Dennis Dalessandro
  - Vivien Didelot (Savoir-faire Linux)
  - Hans de Goede
  - Mel Gorman (SUSE)
  - Sven Eckelmann
  - Alex Elder (Linaro)
  - Fabio Estevam
  - Larry Finger
  - Bhumika Goyal
  - Andy Gross
  - Juergen Gross
  - Shawn Guo
  - Ulf Hansson
  - Stephen Hemminger (Microsoft)
  - Tejun Heo
  - Rob Herring
  - Masami Hiramatsu
  - Michal Hocko
  - Simon Horman
  - Johan Hovold (Hovold Consulting AB)
  - Christophe JAILLET
  - Olof Johansson
  - Lee Jones (Linaro)
  - Heiner Kallweit
  - Srinivas Kandagatla
  - Jan Kara
  - Shuah Khan (Samsung)
  - David Kershner
  - Jaegeuk Kim
  - Namhyung Kim
  - Colin Ian King
  - Jeff Kirsher
  - Greg Kroah-Hartman (Linux Foundation)
  - Christian König
  - Vinod Koul
  - Krzysztof Kozlowski
  - Viresh Kumar
  - Aneesh Kumar K.V
  - Julia Lawall
  - Doug Ledford
  - Chuck Lever (Oracle)
  - Daniel Lezcano
  - Shaohua Li
  - Xin Long
  - Tony Luck
  - Catalin Marinas (Arm Ltd)
  - Mike Marshall
  - Chris Mason
  - Paul E. McKenney
  - Arnaldo Carvalho de Melo
  - David S. Miller
  - Ingo Molnar
  - Kuninori Morimoto
  - Trond Myklebust
  - Martin K. Petersen (Oracle)
  - Borislav Petkov
  - Jiri Pirko
  - Josh Poimboeuf
  - Sebastian Reichel (Collabora)
  - Guenter Roeck
  - Joerg Roedel
  - Leon Romanovsky
  - Steven Rostedt (VMware)
  - Frank Rowand
  - Ivan Safonov
  - Anna Schumaker
  - Jes Sorensen
  - K.Y. Srinivasan
  - David Sterba (SUSE)
  - Heiko Stuebner
  - Jiri Kosina (SUSE)
  - Willy Tarreau
  - Dmitry Torokhov
  - Linus Torvalds
  - Thierry Reding
  - Rik van Riel
  - Luis R. Rodriguez
  - Geert Uytterhoeven (Glider bvba)
  - Eduardo Valentin (Amazon.com)
  - Daniel Vetter
  - Linus Walleij
  - Richard Weinberger
  - Dan Williams
  - Rafael J. Wysocki
  - Arvind Yadav
  - Masahiro Yamada
  - Wei Yongjun
  - Lv Zheng
  - Marc Zyngier (Arm Ltd)
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

.. _kernel_licensing:

Linux kernel licensing rules
============================

The Linux Kernel is provided under the terms of the GNU General Public
License version 2 only (GPL-2.0), as provided in LICENSES/preferred/GPL-2.0,
with an explicit syscall exception described in
LICENSES/exceptions/Linux-syscall-note, as described in the COPYING file.

This documentation file provides a description of how each source file
should be annotated to make its license clear and unambiguous.
It doesn't replace the Kernel's license.

The license described in the COPYING file applies to the kernel source
as a whole, though individual source files can have a different license
which is required to be compatible with the GPL-2.0::

    GPL-1.0+  :  GNU General Public License v1.0 or later
    GPL-2.0+  :  GNU General Public License v2.0 or later
    LGPL-2.0  :  GNU Library General Public License v2 only
    LGPL-2.0+ :  GNU Library General Public License v2 or later
    LGPL-2.1  :  GNU Lesser General Public License v2.1 only
    LGPL-2.1+ :  GNU Lesser General Public License v2.1 or later

Aside from that, individual files can be provided under a dual license,
e.g. one of the compatible GPL variants and alternatively under a
permissive license like BSD, MIT etc.

The User-space API (UAPI) header files, which describe the interface of
user-space programs to the kernel are a special case.  According to the
note in the kernel COPYING file, the syscall interface is a clear boundary,
which does not extend the GPL requirements to any software which uses it to
communicate with the kernel.  Because the UAPI headers must be includable
into any source files which create an executable running on the Linux
kernel, the exception must be documented by a special license expression.

The common way of expressing the license of a source file is to add the
matching boilerplate text into the top comment of the file.  Due to
formatting, typos etc. these "boilerplates" are hard to validate for
tools which are used in the context of license compliance.

An alternative to boilerplate text is the use of Software Package Data
Exchange (SPDX) license identifiers in each source file.  SPDX license
identifiers are machine parsable and precise shorthands for the license
under which the content of the file is contributed.  SPDX license
identifiers are managed by the SPDX Workgroup at the Linux Foundation and
have been agreed on by partners throughout the industry, tool vendors, and
legal teams.  For further information see https://spdx.org/

The Linux kernel requires the precise SPDX identifier in all source files.
The valid identifiers used in the kernel are explained in the section
`License identifiers`_ and have been retrieved from the official SPDX
license list at https://spdx.org/licenses/ along with the license texts.

License identifier syntax
-------------------------

1. Placement:

   The SPDX license identifier in kernel files shall be added at the first
   possible line in a file which can contain a comment.  For the majority
   of files this is the first line, except for scripts which require the
   '#!PATH_TO_INTERPRETER' in the first line.  For those scripts the SPDX
   identifier goes into the second line.

|

2. Style:

   The SPDX license identifier is added in form of a comment.  The comment
   style depends on the file type::

      C source:	// SPDX-License-Identifier: <SPDX License Expression>
      C header:	/* SPDX-License-Identifier: <SPDX License Expression> */
      ASM:	/* SPDX-License-Identifier: <SPDX License Expression> */
      scripts:	# SPDX-License-Identifier: <SPDX License Expression>
      .rst:	.. SPDX-License-Identifier: <SPDX License Expression>
      .dts{i}:	// SPDX-License-Identifier: <SPDX License Expression>

   If a specific tool cannot handle the standard comment style, then the
   appropriate comment mechanism which the tool accepts shall be used. This
   is the reason for having the "/\* \*/" style comment in C header
   files. There was build breakage observed with generated .lds files where
   'ld' failed to parse the C++ comment. This has been fixed by now, but
   there are still older assembler tools which cannot handle C++ style
   comments.

|

3. Syntax:

   A <SPDX License Expression> is either an SPDX short form license
   identifier found on the SPDX License List, or the combination of two
   SPDX short form license identifiers separated by "WITH" when a license
   exception applies. When multiple licenses apply, an expression consists
   of keywords "AND", "OR" separating sub-expressions and surrounded by
   "(", ")" .

   License identifiers for licenses like [L]GPL with the 'or later' option
   are constructed by using a "+" for indicating the 'or later' option.::

      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+
      // SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-2.1+

   WITH should be used when there is a modifier to a license needed.
   For example, the linux kernel UAPI files use the expression::

      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0 WITH Linux-syscall-note
      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+ WITH Linux-syscall-note

   Other examples using WITH exceptions found in the kernel are::

      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0 WITH mif-exception
      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+ WITH GCC-exception-2.0

   Exceptions can only be used with particular License identifiers. The
   valid License identifiers are listed in the tags of the exception text
   file. For details see the point `Exceptions`_ in the chapter `License
   identifiers`_.

   OR should be used if the file is dual licensed and only one license is
   to be selected.  For example, some dtsi files are available under dual
   licenses::

      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0 OR BSD-3-Clause

   Examples from the kernel for license expressions in dual licensed files::

      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0 OR MIT
      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0 OR BSD-2-Clause
      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0 OR Apache-2.0
      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0 OR MPL-1.1
      // SPDX-License-Identifier: (GPL-2.0 WITH Linux-syscall-note) OR MIT
      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-1.0+ OR BSD-3-Clause OR OpenSSL

   AND should be used if the file has multiple licenses whose terms all
   apply to use the file. For example, if code is inherited from another
   project and permission has been given to put it in the kernel, but the
   original license terms need to remain in effect::

      // SPDX-License-Identifier: (GPL-2.0 WITH Linux-syscall-note) AND MIT

   Another other example where both sets of license terms need to be
   adhered to is::

      // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-1.0+ AND LGPL-2.1+

License identifiers
-------------------

The licenses currently used, as well as the licenses for code added to the
kernel, can be broken down into:

1. _`Preferred licenses`:

   Whenever possible these licenses should be used as they are known to be
   fully compatible and widely used.  These licenses are available from the
   directory::

      LICENSES/preferred/

   in the kernel source tree.

   The files in this directory contain the full license text and
   `Metatags`_.  The file names are identical to the SPDX license
   identifier which shall be used for the license in source files.

   Examples::

      LICENSES/preferred/GPL-2.0

   Contains the GPL version 2 license text and the required metatags::

      LICENSES/preferred/MIT

   Contains the MIT license text and the required metatags

   _`Metatags`:

   The following meta tags must be available in a license file:

   - Valid-License-Identifier:

     One or more lines which declare which License Identifiers are valid
     inside the project to reference this particular license text.  Usually
     this is a single valid identifier, but e.g. for licenses with the 'or
     later' options two identifiers are valid.

   - SPDX-URL:

     The URL of the SPDX page which contains additional information related
     to the license.

   - Usage-Guidance:

     Freeform text for usage advice. The text must include correct examples
     for the SPDX license identifiers as they should be put into source
     files according to the `License identifier syntax`_ guidelines.

   - License-Text:

     All text after this tag is treated as the original license text

   File format examples::

      Valid-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0
      Valid-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+
      SPDX-URL: https://spdx.org/licenses/GPL-2.0.html
      Usage-Guide:
        To use this license in source code, put one of the following SPDX
	tag/value pairs into a comment according to the placement
	guidelines in the licensing rules documentation.
	For 'GNU General Public License (GPL) version 2 only' use:
	  SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0
	For 'GNU General Public License (GPL) version 2 or any later version' use:
	  SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+
      License-Text:
        Full license text

   ::

      SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
      SPDX-URL: https://spdx.org/licenses/MIT.html
      Usage-Guide:
	To use this license in source code, put the following SPDX
	tag/value pair into a comment according to the placement
	guidelines in the licensing rules documentation.
	  SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
      License-Text:
        Full license text

|

2. Deprecated licenses:

   These licenses should only be used for existing code or for importing
   code from a different project.  These licenses are available from the
   directory::

      LICENSES/deprecated/

   in the kernel source tree.

   The files in this directory contain the full license text and
   `Metatags`_.  The file names are identical to the SPDX license
   identifier which shall be used for the license in source files.

   Examples::

      LICENSES/deprecated/ISC

   Contains the Internet Systems Consortium license text and the required
   metatags::

      LICENSES/deprecated/GPL-1.0

   Contains the GPL version 1 license text and the required metatags.

   Metatags:

   The metatag requirements for 'other' licenses are identical to the
   requirements of the `Preferred licenses`_.

   File format example::

      Valid-License-Identifier: ISC
      SPDX-URL: https://spdx.org/licenses/ISC.html
      Usage-Guide:
        Usage of this license in the kernel for new code is discouraged
	and it should solely be used for importing code from an already
	existing project.
        To use this license in source code, put the following SPDX
	tag/value pair into a comment according to the placement
	guidelines in the licensing rules documentation.
	  SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
      License-Text:
        Full license text

|

3. Dual Licensing Only

   These licenses should only be used to dual license code with another
   license in addition to a preferred license.  These licenses are available
   from the directory::

      LICENSES/dual/

   in the kernel source tree.

   The files in this directory contain the full license text and
   `Metatags`_.  The file names are identical to the SPDX license
   identifier which shall be used for the license in source files.

   Examples::

      LICENSES/dual/MPL-1.1

   Contains the Mozilla Public License version 1.1 license text and the
   required metatags::

      LICENSES/dual/Apache-2.0

   Contains the Apache License version 2.0 license text and the required
   metatags.

   Metatags:

   The metatag requirements for 'other' licenses are identical to the
   requirements of the `Preferred licenses`_.

   File format example::

      Valid-License-Identifier: MPL-1.1
      SPDX-URL: https://spdx.org/licenses/MPL-1.1.html
      Usage-Guide:
        Do NOT use. The MPL-1.1 is not GPL2 compatible. It may only be used for
        dual-licensed files where the other license is GPL2 compatible.
        If you end up using this it MUST be used together with a GPL2 compatible
        license using "OR".
        To use the Mozilla Public License version 1.1 put the following SPDX
        tag/value pair into a comment according to the placement guidelines in
        the licensing rules documentation:
      SPDX-License-Identifier: MPL-1.1
      License-Text:
        Full license text

|

4. _`Exceptions`:

   Some licenses can be amended with exceptions which grant certain rights
   which the original license does not.  These exceptions are available
   from the directory::

      LICENSES/exceptions/

   in the kernel source tree.  The files in this directory contain the full
   exception text and the required `Exception Metatags`_.

   Examples::

      LICENSES/exceptions/Linux-syscall-note

   Contains the Linux syscall exception as documented in the COPYING
   file of the Linux kernel, which is used for UAPI header files.
   e.g. /\* SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0 WITH Linux-syscall-note \*/::

      LICENSES/exceptions/GCC-exception-2.0

   Contains the GCC 'linking exception' which allows to link any binary
   independent of its license against the compiled version of a file marked
   with this exception. This is required for creating runnable executables
   from source code which is not compatible with the GPL.

   _`Exception Metatags`:

   The following meta tags must be available in an exception file:

   - SPDX-Exception-Identifier:

     One exception identifier which can be used with SPDX license
     identifiers.

   - SPDX-URL:

     The URL of the SPDX page which contains additional information related
     to the exception.

   - SPDX-Licenses:

     A comma separated list of SPDX license identifiers for which the
     exception can be used.

   - Usage-Guidance:

     Freeform text for usage advice. The text must be followed by correct
     examples for the SPDX license identifiers as they should be put into
     source files according to the `License identifier syntax`_ guidelines.

   - Exception-Text:

     All text after this tag is treated as the original exception text

   File format examples::

      SPDX-Exception-Identifier: Linux-syscall-note
      SPDX-URL: https://spdx.org/licenses/Linux-syscall-note.html
      SPDX-Licenses: GPL-2.0, GPL-2.0+, GPL-1.0+, LGPL-2.0, LGPL-2.0+, LGPL-2.1, LGPL-2.1+
      Usage-Guidance:
        This exception is used together with one of the above SPDX-Licenses
	to mark user-space API (uapi) header files so they can be included
	into non GPL compliant user-space application code.
        To use this exception add it with the keyword WITH to one of the
	identifiers in the SPDX-Licenses tag:
	  SPDX-License-Identifier: <SPDX-License> WITH Linux-syscall-note
      Exception-Text:
        Full exception text

   ::

      SPDX-Exception-Identifier: GCC-exception-2.0
      SPDX-URL: https://spdx.org/licenses/GCC-exception-2.0.html
      SPDX-Licenses: GPL-2.0, GPL-2.0+
      Usage-Guidance:
        The "GCC Runtime Library exception 2.0" is used together with one
	of the above SPDX-Licenses for code imported from the GCC runtime
	library.
        To use this exception add it with the keyword WITH to one of the
	identifiers in the SPDX-Licenses tag:
	  SPDX-License-Identifier: <SPDX-License> WITH GCC-exception-2.0
      Exception-Text:
        Full exception text


All SPDX license identifiers and exceptions must have a corresponding file
in the LICENSES subdirectories. This is required to allow tool
verification (e.g. checkpatch.pl) and to have the licenses ready to read
and extract right from the source, which is recommended by various FOSS
organizations, e.g. the `FSFE REUSE initiative <https://reuse.software/>`_.

_`MODULE_LICENSE`
-----------------

   Loadable kernel modules also require a MODULE_LICENSE() tag. This tag is
   neither a replacement for proper source code license information
   (SPDX-License-Identifier) nor in any way relevant for expressing or
   determining the exact license under which the source code of the module
   is provided.

   The sole purpose of this tag is to provide sufficient information
   whether the module is free software or proprietary for the kernel
   module loader and for user space tools.

   The valid license strings for MODULE_LICENSE() are:

    ============================= =============================================
    "GPL"			  Module is licensed under GPL version 2. This
				  does not express any distinction between
				  GPL-2.0-only or GPL-2.0-or-later. The exact
				  license information can only be determined
				  via the license information in the
				  corresponding source files.

    "GPL v2"			  Same as "GPL". It exists for historic
				  reasons.

    "GPL and additional rights"   Historical variant of expressing that the
				  module source is dual licensed under a
				  GPL v2 variant and MIT license. Please do
				  not use in new code.

    "Dual MIT/GPL"		  The correct way of expressing that the
				  module is dual licensed under a GPL v2
				  variant or MIT license choice.

    "Dual BSD/GPL"		  The module is dual licensed under a GPL v2
				  variant or BSD license choice. The exact
				  variant of the BSD license can only be
				  determined via the license information
				  in the corresponding source files.

    "Dual MPL/GPL"		  The module is dual licensed under a GPL v2
				  variant or Mozilla Public License (MPL)
				  choice. The exact variant of the MPL
				  license can only be determined via the
				  license information in the corresponding
				  source files.

    "Proprietary"		  The module is under a proprietary license.
				  This string is solely for proprietary third
				  party modules and cannot be used for modules
				  which have their source code in the kernel
				  tree. Modules tagged that way are tainting
				  the kernel with the 'P' flag when loaded and
				  the kernel module loader refuses to link such
				  modules against symbols which are exported
				  with EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL().
    ============================= =============================================



.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

.. _maintainer_handbooks_main:

Subsystem and maintainer tree specific development process notes
================================================================

The purpose of this document is to provide subsystem specific information
which is supplementary to the general development process handbook
:ref:`Documentation/process <development_process_main>`.

Contents:

.. toctree::
   :numbered:
   :maxdepth: 2

   maintainer-netdev
   maintainer-soc
   maintainer-soc-clean-dts
   maintainer-tip
   maintainer-kvm-x86
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

KVM x86
=======

Foreword
--------
KVM strives to be a welcoming community; contributions from newcomers are
valued and encouraged.  Please do not be discouraged or intimidated by the
length of this document and the many rules/guidelines it contains.  Everyone
makes mistakes, and everyone was a newbie at some point.  So long as you make
an honest effort to follow KVM x86's guidelines, are receptive to feedback,
and learn from any mistakes you make, you will be welcomed with open arms, not
torches and pitchforks.

TL;DR
-----
Testing is mandatory.  Be consistent with established styles and patterns.

Trees
-----
KVM x86 is currently in a transition period from being part of the main KVM
tree, to being "just another KVM arch".  As such, KVM x86 is split across the
main KVM tree, ``git.kernel.org/pub/scm/virt/kvm/kvm.git``, and a KVM x86
specific tree, ``github.com/kvm-x86/linux.git``.

Generally speaking, fixes for the current cycle are applied directly to the
main KVM tree, while all development for the next cycle is routed through the
KVM x86 tree.  In the unlikely event that a fix for the current cycle is routed
through the KVM x86 tree, it will be applied to the ``fixes`` branch before
making its way to the main KVM tree.

Note, this transition period is expected to last quite some time, i.e. will be
the status quo for the foreseeable future.

Branches
~~~~~~~~
The KVM x86 tree is organized into multiple topic branches.  The purpose of
using finer-grained topic branches is to make it easier to keep tabs on an area
of development, and to limit the collateral damage of human errors and/or buggy
commits, e.g. dropping the HEAD commit of a topic branch has no impact on other
in-flight commits' SHA1 hashes, and having to reject a pull request due to bugs
delays only that topic branch.

All topic branches, except for ``next`` and ``fixes``, are rolled into ``next``
via a Cthulhu merge on an as-needed basis, i.e. when a topic branch is updated.
As a result, force pushes to ``next`` are common.

Lifecycle
~~~~~~~~~
Fixes that target the current release, a.k.a. mainline, are typically applied
directly to the main KVM tree, i.e. do not route through the KVM x86 tree.

Changes that target the next release are routed through the KVM x86 tree.  Pull
requests (from KVM x86 to main KVM) are sent for each KVM x86 topic branch,
typically the week before Linus' opening of the merge window, e.g. the week
following rc7 for "normal" releases.  If all goes well, the topic branches are
rolled into the main KVM pull request sent during Linus' merge window.

The KVM x86 tree doesn't have its own official merge window, but there's a soft
close around rc5 for new features, and a soft close around rc6 for fixes (for
the next release; see above for fixes that target the current release).

Timeline
~~~~~~~~
Submissions are typically reviewed and applied in FIFO order, with some wiggle
room for the size of a series, patches that are "cache hot", etc.  Fixes,
especially for the current release and or stable trees, get to jump the queue.
Patches that will be taken through a non-KVM tree (most often through the tip
tree) and/or have other acks/reviews also jump the queue to some extent.

Note, the vast majority of review is done between rc1 and rc6, give or take.
The period between rc6 and the next rc1 is used to catch up on other tasks,
i.e. radio silence during this period isn't unusual.

Pings to get a status update are welcome, but keep in mind the timing of the
current release cycle and have realistic expectations.  If you are pinging for
acceptance, i.e. not just for feedback or an update, please do everything you
can, within reason, to ensure that your patches are ready to be merged!  Pings
on series that break the build or fail tests lead to unhappy maintainers!

Development
-----------

Base Tree/Branch
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Fixes that target the current release, a.k.a. mainline, should be based on
``git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/virt/kvm/kvm.git master``.  Note, fixes do not
automatically warrant inclusion in the current release.  There is no singular
rule, but typically only fixes for bugs that are urgent, critical, and/or were
introduced in the current release should target the current release.

Everything else should be based on ``kvm-x86/next``, i.e. there is no need to
select a specific topic branch as the base.  If there are conflicts and/or
dependencies across topic branches, it is the maintainer's job to sort them
out.

The only exception to using ``kvm-x86/next`` as the base is if a patch/series
is a multi-arch series, i.e. has non-trivial modifications to common KVM code
and/or has more than superficial changes to other architectures' code.  Multi-
arch patch/series should instead be based on a common, stable point in KVM's
history, e.g. the release candidate upon which ``kvm-x86 next`` is based.  If
you're unsure whether a patch/series is truly multi-arch, err on the side of
caution and treat it as multi-arch, i.e. use a common base.

Coding Style
~~~~~~~~~~~~
When it comes to style, naming, patterns, etc., consistency is the number one
priority in KVM x86.  If all else fails, match what already exists.

With a few caveats listed below, follow the tip tree maintainers' preferred
:ref:`maintainer-tip-coding-style`, as patches/series often touch both KVM and
non-KVM x86 files, i.e. draw the attention of KVM *and* tip tree maintainers.

Using reverse fir tree, a.k.a. reverse Christmas tree or reverse XMAS tree, for
variable declarations isn't strictly required, though it is still preferred.

Except for a handful of special snowflakes, do not use kernel-doc comments for
functions.  The vast majority of "public" KVM functions aren't truly public as
they are intended only for KVM-internal consumption (there are plans to
privatize KVM's headers and exports to enforce this).

Comments
~~~~~~~~
Write comments using imperative mood and avoid pronouns.  Use comments to
provide a high level overview of the code, and/or to explain why the code does
what it does.  Do not reiterate what the code literally does; let the code
speak for itself.  If the code itself is inscrutable, comments will not help.

SDM and APM References
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Much of KVM's code base is directly tied to architectural behavior defined in
Intel's Software Development Manual (SDM) and AMD's Architecture Programmer’s
Manual (APM).  Use of "Intel's SDM" and "AMD's APM", or even just "SDM" or
"APM", without additional context is a-ok.

Do not reference specific sections, tables, figures, etc. by number, especially
not in comments.  Instead, if necessary (see below), copy-paste the relevant
snippet and reference sections/tables/figures by name.  The layouts of the SDM
and APM are constantly changing, and so the numbers/labels aren't stable.

Generally speaking, do not explicitly reference or copy-paste from the SDM or
APM in comments.  With few exceptions, KVM *must* honor architectural behavior,
therefore it's implied that KVM behavior is emulating SDM and/or APM behavior.
Note, referencing the SDM/APM in changelogs to justify the change and provide
context is perfectly ok and encouraged.

Shortlog
~~~~~~~~
The preferred prefix format is ``KVM: <topic>:``, where ``<topic>`` is one of::

  - x86
  - x86/mmu
  - x86/pmu
  - x86/xen
  - selftests
  - SVM
  - nSVM
  - VMX
  - nVMX

**DO NOT use x86/kvm!**  ``x86/kvm`` is used exclusively for Linux-as-a-KVM-guest
changes, i.e. for arch/x86/kernel/kvm.c.  Do not use file names or complete file
paths as the subject/shortlog prefix.

Note, these don't align with the topics branches (the topic branches care much
more about code conflicts).

All names are case sensitive!  ``KVM: x86:`` is good, ``kvm: vmx:`` is not.

Capitalize the first word of the condensed patch description, but omit ending
punctionation.  E.g.::

    KVM: x86: Fix a null pointer dereference in function_xyz()

not::

    kvm: x86: fix a null pointer dereference in function_xyz.

If a patch touches multiple topics, traverse up the conceptual tree to find the
first common parent (which is often simply ``x86``).  When in doubt,
``git log path/to/file`` should provide a reasonable hint.

New topics do occasionally pop up, but please start an on-list discussion if
you want to propose introducing a new topic, i.e. don't go rogue.

See :ref:`the_canonical_patch_format` for more information, with one amendment:
do not treat the 70-75 character limit as an absolute, hard limit.  Instead,
use 75 characters as a firm-but-not-hard limit, and use 80 characters as a hard
limit.  I.e. let the shortlog run a few characters over the standard limit if
you have good reason to do so.

Changelog
~~~~~~~~~
Most importantly, write changelogs using imperative mood and avoid pronouns.

See :ref:`describe_changes` for more information, with one amendment: lead with
a short blurb on the actual changes, and then follow up with the context and
background.  Note!  This order directly conflicts with the tip tree's preferred
approach!  Please follow the tip tree's preferred style when sending patches
that primarily target arch/x86 code that is _NOT_ KVM code.

Stating what a patch does before diving into details is preferred by KVM x86
for several reasons.  First and foremost, what code is actually being changed
is arguably the most important information, and so that info should be easy to
find. Changelogs that bury the "what's actually changing" in a one-liner after
3+ paragraphs of background make it very hard to find that information.

For initial review, one could argue the "what's broken" is more important, but
for skimming logs and git archaeology, the gory details matter less and less.
E.g. when doing a series of "git blame", the details of each change along the
way are useless, the details only matter for the culprit.  Providing the "what
changed" makes it easy to quickly determine whether or not a commit might be of
interest.

Another benefit of stating "what's changing" first is that it's almost always
possible to state "what's changing" in a single sentence.  Conversely, all but
the most simple bugs require multiple sentences or paragraphs to fully describe
the problem.  If both the "what's changing" and "what's the bug" are super
short then the order doesn't matter.  But if one is shorter (almost always the
"what's changing), then covering the shorter one first is advantageous because
it's less of an inconvenience for readers/reviewers that have a strict ordering
preference.  E.g. having to skip one sentence to get to the context is less
painful than having to skip three paragraphs to get to "what's changing".

Fixes
~~~~~
If a change fixes a KVM/kernel bug, add a Fixes: tag even if the change doesn't
need to be backported to stable kernels, and even if the change fixes a bug in
an older release.

Conversely, if a fix does need to be backported, explicitly tag the patch with
"Cc: stable@vger.kernel" (though the email itself doesn't need to Cc: stable);
KVM x86 opts out of backporting Fixes: by default.  Some auto-selected patches
do get backported, but require explicit maintainer approval (search MANUALSEL).

Function References
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
When a function is mentioned in a comment, changelog, or shortlog (or anywhere
for that matter), use the format ``function_name()``.  The parentheses provide
context and disambiguate the reference.

Testing
-------
At a bare minimum, *all* patches in a series must build cleanly for KVM_INTEL=m
KVM_AMD=m, and KVM_WERROR=y.  Building every possible combination of Kconfigs
isn't feasible, but the more the merrier.  KVM_SMM, KVM_XEN, PROVE_LOCKING, and
X86_64 are particularly interesting knobs to turn.

Running KVM selftests and KVM-unit-tests is also mandatory (and stating the
obvious, the tests need to pass).  The only exception is for changes that have
negligible probability of affecting runtime behavior, e.g. patches that only
modify comments.  When possible and relevant, testing on both Intel and AMD is
strongly preferred.  Booting an actual VM is encouraged, but not mandatory.

For changes that touch KVM's shadow paging code, running with TDP (EPT/NPT)
disabled is mandatory.  For changes that affect common KVM MMU code, running
with TDP disabled is strongly encouraged.  For all other changes, if the code
being modified depends on and/or interacts with a module param, testing with
the relevant settings is mandatory.

Note, KVM selftests and KVM-unit-tests do have known failures.  If you suspect
a failure is not due to your changes, verify that the *exact same* failure
occurs with and without your changes.

Changes that touch reStructured Text documentation, i.e. .rst files, must build
htmldocs cleanly, i.e. with no new warnings or errors.

If you can't fully test a change, e.g. due to lack of hardware, clearly state
what level of testing you were able to do, e.g. in the cover letter.

New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~
With one exception, new features *must* come with test coverage.  KVM specific
tests aren't strictly required, e.g. if coverage is provided by running a
sufficiently enabled guest VM, or by running a related kernel selftest in a VM,
but dedicated KVM tests are preferred in all cases.  Negative testcases in
particular are mandatory for enabling of new hardware features as error and
exception flows are rarely exercised simply by running a VM.

The only exception to this rule is if KVM is simply advertising support for a
feature via KVM_GET_SUPPORTED_CPUID, i.e. for instructions/features that KVM
can't prevent a guest from using and for which there is no true enabling.

Note, "new features" does not just mean "new hardware features"!  New features
that can't be well validated using existing KVM selftests and/or KVM-unit-tests
must come with tests.

Posting new feature development without tests to get early feedback is more
than welcome, but such submissions should be tagged RFC, and the cover letter
should clearly state what type of feedback is requested/expected.  Do not abuse
the RFC process; RFCs will typically not receive in-depth review.

Bug Fixes
~~~~~~~~~
Except for "obvious" found-by-inspection bugs, fixes must be accompanied by a
reproducer for the bug being fixed.  In many cases the reproducer is implicit,
e.g. for build errors and test failures, but it should still be clear to
readers what is broken and how to verify the fix.  Some leeway is given for
bugs that are found via non-public workloads/tests, but providing regression
tests for such bugs is strongly preferred.

In general, regression tests are preferred for any bug that is not trivial to
hit.  E.g. even if the bug was originally found by a fuzzer such as syzkaller,
a targeted regression test may be warranted if the bug requires hitting a
one-in-a-million type race condition.

Note, KVM bugs are rarely urgent *and* non-trivial to reproduce.  Ask yourself
if a bug is really truly the end of the world before posting a fix without a
reproducer.

Posting
-------

Links
~~~~~
Do not explicitly reference bug reports, prior versions of a patch/series, etc.
via ``In-Reply-To:`` headers.  Using ``In-Reply-To:`` becomes an unholy mess
for large series and/or when the version count gets high, and ``In-Reply-To:``
is useless for anyone that doesn't have the original message, e.g. if someone
wasn't Cc'd on the bug report or if the list of recipients changes between
versions.

To link to a bug report, previous version, or anything of interest, use lore
links.  For referencing previous version(s), generally speaking do not include
a Link: in the changelog as there is no need to record the history in git, i.e.
put the link in the cover letter or in the section git ignores.  Do provide a
formal Link: for bug reports and/or discussions that led to the patch.  The
context of why a change was made is highly valuable for future readers.

Git Base
~~~~~~~~
If you are using git version 2.9.0 or later (Googlers, this is all of you!),
use ``git format-patch`` with the ``--base`` flag to automatically include the
base tree information in the generated patches.

Note, ``--base=auto`` works as expected if and only if a branch's upstream is
set to the base topic branch, e.g. it will do the wrong thing if your upstream
is set to your personal repository for backup purposes.  An alternative "auto"
solution is to derive the names of your development branches based on their
KVM x86 topic, and feed that into ``--base``.  E.g. ``x86/pmu/my_branch_name``,
and then write a small wrapper to extract ``pmu`` from the current branch name
to yield ``--base=x/pmu``, where ``x`` is whatever name your repository uses to
track the KVM x86 remote.

Co-Posting Tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
KVM selftests that are associated with KVM changes, e.g. regression tests for
bug fixes, should be posted along with the KVM changes as a single series.  The
standard kernel rules for bisection apply, i.e. KVM changes that result in test
failures should be ordered after the selftests updates, and vice versa, new
tests that fail due to KVM bugs should be ordered after the KVM fixes.

KVM-unit-tests should *always* be posted separately.  Tools, e.g. b4 am, don't
know that KVM-unit-tests is a separate repository and get confused when patches
in a series apply on different trees.  To tie KVM-unit-tests patches back to
KVM patches, first post the KVM changes and then provide a lore Link: to the
KVM patch/series in the KVM-unit-tests patch(es).

Notifications
-------------
When a patch/series is officially accepted, a notification email will be sent
in reply to the original posting (cover letter for multi-patch series).  The
notification will include the tree and topic branch, along with the SHA1s of
the commits of applied patches.

If a subset of patches is applied, this will be clearly stated in the
notification.  Unless stated otherwise, it's implied that any patches in the
series that were not accepted need more work and should be submitted in a new
version.

If for some reason a patch is dropped after officially being accepted, a reply
will be sent to the notification email explaining why the patch was dropped, as
well as the next steps.

SHA1 Stability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
SHA1s are not 100% guaranteed to be stable until they land in Linus' tree!  A
SHA1 is *usually* stable once a notification has been sent, but things happen.
In most cases, an update to the notification email be provided if an applied
patch's SHA1 changes.  However, in some scenarios, e.g. if all KVM x86 branches
need to be rebased, individual notifications will not be given.

Vulnerabilities
---------------
Bugs that can be exploited by the guest to attack the host (kernel or
userspace), or that can be exploited by a nested VM to *its* host (L2 attacking
L1), are of particular interest to KVM.  Please follow the protocol for
:ref:`securitybugs` if you suspect a bug can lead to an escape, data leak, etc.

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

.. _netdev-FAQ:

=============================
Networking subsystem (netdev)
=============================

tl;dr
-----

 - designate your patch to a tree - ``[PATCH net]`` or ``[PATCH net-next]``
 - for fixes the ``Fixes:`` tag is required, regardless of the tree
 - don't post large series (> 15 patches), break them up
 - don't repost your patches within one 24h period
 - reverse xmas tree

netdev
------

netdev is a mailing list for all network-related Linux stuff.  This
includes anything found under net/ (i.e. core code like IPv6) and
drivers/net (i.e. hardware specific drivers) in the Linux source tree.

Note that some subsystems (e.g. wireless drivers) which have a high
volume of traffic have their own specific mailing lists and trees.

Like many other Linux mailing lists, the netdev list is hosted at
kernel.org with archives available at https://lore.kernel.org/netdev/.

Aside from subsystems like those mentioned above, all network-related
Linux development (i.e. RFC, review, comments, etc.) takes place on
netdev.

Development cycle
-----------------

Here is a bit of background information on
the cadence of Linux development.  Each new release starts off with a
two week "merge window" where the main maintainers feed their new stuff
to Linus for merging into the mainline tree.  After the two weeks, the
merge window is closed, and it is called/tagged ``-rc1``.  No new
features get mainlined after this -- only fixes to the rc1 content are
expected.  After roughly a week of collecting fixes to the rc1 content,
rc2 is released.  This repeats on a roughly weekly basis until rc7
(typically; sometimes rc6 if things are quiet, or rc8 if things are in a
state of churn), and a week after the last vX.Y-rcN was done, the
official vX.Y is released.

To find out where we are now in the cycle - load the mainline (Linus)
page here:

  https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git

and note the top of the "tags" section.  If it is rc1, it is early in
the dev cycle.  If it was tagged rc7 a week ago, then a release is
probably imminent. If the most recent tag is a final release tag
(without an ``-rcN`` suffix) - we are most likely in a merge window
and ``net-next`` is closed.

git trees and patch flow
------------------------

There are two networking trees (git repositories) in play.  Both are
driven by David Miller, the main network maintainer.  There is the
``net`` tree, and the ``net-next`` tree.  As you can probably guess from
the names, the ``net`` tree is for fixes to existing code already in the
mainline tree from Linus, and ``net-next`` is where the new code goes
for the future release.  You can find the trees here:

- https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/netdev/net.git
- https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/netdev/net-next.git

Relating that to kernel development: At the beginning of the 2-week
merge window, the ``net-next`` tree will be closed - no new changes/features.
The accumulated new content of the past ~10 weeks will be passed onto
mainline/Linus via a pull request for vX.Y -- at the same time, the
``net`` tree will start accumulating fixes for this pulled content
relating to vX.Y

An announcement indicating when ``net-next`` has been closed is usually
sent to netdev, but knowing the above, you can predict that in advance.

.. warning::
  Do not send new ``net-next`` content to netdev during the
  period during which ``net-next`` tree is closed.

RFC patches sent for review only are obviously welcome at any time
(use ``--subject-prefix='RFC net-next'`` with ``git format-patch``).

Shortly after the two weeks have passed (and vX.Y-rc1 is released), the
tree for ``net-next`` reopens to collect content for the next (vX.Y+1)
release.

If you aren't subscribed to netdev and/or are simply unsure if
``net-next`` has re-opened yet, simply check the ``net-next`` git
repository link above for any new networking-related commits.  You may
also check the following website for the current status:

  https://netdev.bots.linux.dev/net-next.html

The ``net`` tree continues to collect fixes for the vX.Y content, and is
fed back to Linus at regular (~weekly) intervals.  Meaning that the
focus for ``net`` is on stabilization and bug fixes.

Finally, the vX.Y gets released, and the whole cycle starts over.

netdev patch review
-------------------

.. _patch_status:

Patch status
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Status of a patch can be checked by looking at the main patchwork
queue for netdev:

  https://patchwork.kernel.org/project/netdevbpf/list/

The "State" field will tell you exactly where things are at with your
patch:

================== =============================================================
Patch state        Description
================== =============================================================
New, Under review  pending review, patch is in the maintainer’s queue for
                   review; the two states are used interchangeably (depending on
                   the exact co-maintainer handling patchwork at the time)
Accepted           patch was applied to the appropriate networking tree, this is
                   usually set automatically by the pw-bot
Needs ACK          waiting for an ack from an area expert or testing
Changes requested  patch has not passed the review, new revision is expected
                   with appropriate code and commit message changes
Rejected           patch has been rejected and new revision is not expected
Not applicable     patch is expected to be applied outside of the networking
                   subsystem
Awaiting upstream  patch should be reviewed and handled by appropriate
                   sub-maintainer, who will send it on to the networking trees;
                   patches set to ``Awaiting upstream`` in netdev's patchwork
                   will usually remain in this state, whether the sub-maintainer
                   requested changes, accepted or rejected the patch
Deferred           patch needs to be reposted later, usually due to dependency
                   or because it was posted for a closed tree
Superseded         new version of the patch was posted, usually set by the
                   pw-bot
RFC                not to be applied, usually not in maintainer’s review queue,
                   pw-bot can automatically set patches to this state based
                   on subject tags
================== =============================================================

Patches are indexed by the ``Message-ID`` header of the emails
which carried them so if you have trouble finding your patch append
the value of ``Message-ID`` to the URL above.

Updating patch status
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Contributors and reviewers do not have the permissions to update patch
state directly in patchwork. Patchwork doesn't expose much information
about the history of the state of patches, therefore having multiple
people update the state leads to confusion.

Instead of delegating patchwork permissions netdev uses a simple mail
bot which looks for special commands/lines within the emails sent to
the mailing list. For example to mark a series as Changes Requested
one needs to send the following line anywhere in the email thread::

  pw-bot: changes-requested

As a result the bot will set the entire series to Changes Requested.
This may be useful when author discovers a bug in their own series
and wants to prevent it from getting applied.

The use of the bot is entirely optional, if in doubt ignore its existence
completely. Maintainers will classify and update the state of the patches
themselves. No email should ever be sent to the list with the main purpose
of communicating with the bot, the bot commands should be seen as metadata.

The use of the bot is restricted to authors of the patches (the ``From:``
header on patch submission and command must match!), maintainers of
the modified code according to the MAINTAINERS file (again, ``From:``
must match the MAINTAINERS entry) and a handful of senior reviewers.

Bot records its activity here:

  https://netdev.bots.linux.dev/pw-bot.html

Review timelines
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Generally speaking, the patches get triaged quickly (in less than
48h). But be patient, if your patch is active in patchwork (i.e. it's
listed on the project's patch list) the chances it was missed are close to zero.

The high volume of development on netdev makes reviewers move on
from discussions relatively quickly. New comments and replies
are very unlikely to arrive after a week of silence. If a patch
is no longer active in patchwork and the thread went idle for more
than a week - clarify the next steps and/or post the next version.

For RFC postings specifically, if nobody responded in a week - reviewers
either missed the posting or have no strong opinions. If the code is ready,
repost as a PATCH.

Emails saying just "ping" or "bump" are considered rude. If you can't figure
out the status of the patch from patchwork or where the discussion has
landed - describe your best guess and ask if it's correct. For example::

  I don't understand what the next steps are. Person X seems to be unhappy
  with A, should I do B and repost the patches?

.. _Changes requested:

Changes requested
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Patches :ref:`marked<patch_status>` as ``Changes Requested`` need
to be revised. The new version should come with a change log,
preferably including links to previous postings, for example::

  [PATCH net-next v3] net: make cows go moo

  Even users who don't drink milk appreciate hearing the cows go "moo".

  The amount of mooing will depend on packet rate so should match
  the diurnal cycle quite well.

  Signed-off-by: Joe Defarmer <joe@barn.org>
  ---
  v3:
    - add a note about time-of-day mooing fluctuation to the commit message
  v2: https://lore.kernel.org/netdev/123themessageid@barn.org/
    - fix missing argument in kernel doc for netif_is_bovine()
    - fix memory leak in netdev_register_cow()
  v1: https://lore.kernel.org/netdev/456getstheclicks@barn.org/

The commit message should be revised to answer any questions reviewers
had to ask in previous discussions. Occasionally the update of
the commit message will be the only change in the new version.

Partial resends
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Please always resend the entire patch series and make sure you do number your
patches such that it is clear this is the latest and greatest set of patches
that can be applied. Do not try to resend just the patches which changed.

Handling misapplied patches
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Occasionally a patch series gets applied before receiving critical feedback,
or the wrong version of a series gets applied.

Making the patch disappear once it is pushed out is not possible, the commit
history in netdev trees is immutable.
Please send incremental versions on top of what has been merged in order to fix
the patches the way they would look like if your latest patch series was to be
merged.

In cases where full revert is needed the revert has to be submitted
as a patch to the list with a commit message explaining the technical
problems with the reverted commit. Reverts should be used as a last resort,
when original change is completely wrong; incremental fixes are preferred.

Stable tree
~~~~~~~~~~~

While it used to be the case that netdev submissions were not supposed
to carry explicit ``CC: stable@vger.kernel.org`` tags that is no longer
the case today. Please follow the standard stable rules in
:ref:`Documentation/process/stable-kernel-rules.rst <stable_kernel_rules>`,
and make sure you include appropriate Fixes tags!

Security fixes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Do not email netdev maintainers directly if you think you discovered
a bug that might have possible security implications.
The current netdev maintainer has consistently requested that
people use the mailing lists and not reach out directly.  If you aren't
OK with that, then perhaps consider mailing security@kernel.org or
reading about http://oss-security.openwall.org/wiki/mailing-lists/distros
as possible alternative mechanisms.


Co-posting changes to user space components
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

User space code exercising kernel features should be posted
alongside kernel patches. This gives reviewers a chance to see
how any new interface is used and how well it works.

When user space tools reside in the kernel repo itself all changes
should generally come as one series. If series becomes too large
or the user space project is not reviewed on netdev include a link
to a public repo where user space patches can be seen.

In case user space tooling lives in a separate repository but is
reviewed on netdev  (e.g. patches to ``iproute2`` tools) kernel and
user space patches should form separate series (threads) when posted
to the mailing list, e.g.::

  [PATCH net-next 0/3] net: some feature cover letter
   └─ [PATCH net-next 1/3] net: some feature prep
   └─ [PATCH net-next 2/3] net: some feature do it
   └─ [PATCH net-next 3/3] selftest: net: some feature

  [PATCH iproute2-next] ip: add support for some feature

Posting as one thread is discouraged because it confuses patchwork
(as of patchwork 2.2.2).

Preparing changes
-----------------

Attention to detail is important.  Re-read your own work as if you were the
reviewer.  You can start with using ``checkpatch.pl``, perhaps even with
the ``--strict`` flag.  But do not be mindlessly robotic in doing so.
If your change is a bug fix, make sure your commit log indicates the
end-user visible symptom, the underlying reason as to why it happens,
and then if necessary, explain why the fix proposed is the best way to
get things done.  Don't mangle whitespace, and as is common, don't
mis-indent function arguments that span multiple lines.  If it is your
first patch, mail it to yourself so you can test apply it to an
unpatched tree to confirm infrastructure didn't mangle it.

Finally, go back and read
:ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`
to be sure you are not repeating some common mistake documented there.

Indicating target tree
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To help maintainers and CI bots you should explicitly mark which tree
your patch is targeting. Assuming that you use git, use the prefix
flag::

  git format-patch --subject-prefix='PATCH net-next' start..finish

Use ``net`` instead of ``net-next`` (always lower case) in the above for
bug-fix ``net`` content.

Dividing work into patches
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Put yourself in the shoes of the reviewer. Each patch is read separately
and therefore should constitute a comprehensible step towards your stated
goal.

Avoid sending series longer than 15 patches. Larger series takes longer
to review as reviewers will defer looking at it until they find a large
chunk of time. A small series can be reviewed in a short time, so Maintainers
just do it. As a result, a sequence of smaller series gets merged quicker and
with better review coverage. Re-posting large series also increases the mailing
list traffic.

.. _rcs:

Local variable ordering ("reverse xmas tree", "RCS")
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Netdev has a convention for ordering local variables in functions.
Order the variable declaration lines longest to shortest, e.g.::

  struct scatterlist *sg;
  struct sk_buff *skb;
  int err, i;

If there are dependencies between the variables preventing the ordering
move the initialization out of line.

Format precedence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When working in existing code which uses nonstandard formatting make
your code follow the most recent guidelines, so that eventually all code
in the domain of netdev is in the preferred format.

Using device-managed and cleanup.h constructs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Netdev remains skeptical about promises of all "auto-cleanup" APIs,
including even ``devm_`` helpers, historically. They are not the preferred
style of implementation, merely an acceptable one.

Use of ``guard()`` is discouraged within any function longer than 20 lines,
``scoped_guard()`` is considered more readable. Using normal lock/unlock is
still (weakly) preferred.

Low level cleanup constructs (such as ``__free()``) can be used when building
APIs and helpers, especially scoped iterators. However, direct use of
``__free()`` within networking core and drivers is discouraged.
Similar guidance applies to declaring variables mid-function.

Clean-up patches
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Netdev discourages patches which perform simple clean-ups, which are not in
the context of other work. For example:

* Addressing ``checkpatch.pl`` warnings
* Addressing :ref:`Local variable ordering<rcs>` issues
* Conversions to device-managed APIs (``devm_`` helpers)

This is because it is felt that the churn that such changes produce comes
at a greater cost than the value of such clean-ups.

Conversely, spelling and grammar fixes are not discouraged.

Resending after review
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Allow at least 24 hours to pass between postings. This will ensure reviewers
from all geographical locations have a chance to chime in. Do not wait
too long (weeks) between postings either as it will make it harder for reviewers
to recall all the context.

Make sure you address all the feedback in your new posting. Do not post a new
version of the code if the discussion about the previous version is still
ongoing, unless directly instructed by a reviewer.

The new version of patches should be posted as a separate thread,
not as a reply to the previous posting. Change log should include a link
to the previous posting (see :ref:`Changes requested`).

Testing
-------

Expected level of testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At the very minimum your changes must survive an ``allyesconfig`` and an
``allmodconfig`` build with ``W=1`` set without new warnings or failures.

Ideally you will have done run-time testing specific to your change,
and the patch series contains a set of kernel selftest for
``tools/testing/selftests/net`` or using the KUnit framework.

You are expected to test your changes on top of the relevant networking
tree (``net`` or ``net-next``) and not e.g. a stable tree or ``linux-next``.

patchwork checks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Checks in patchwork are mostly simple wrappers around existing kernel
scripts, the sources are available at:

https://github.com/linux-netdev/nipa/tree/master/tests

**Do not** post your patches just to run them through the checks.
You must ensure that your patches are ready by testing them locally
before posting to the mailing list. The patchwork build bot instance
gets overloaded very easily and netdev@vger really doesn't need more
traffic if we can help it.

netdevsim
~~~~~~~~~

``netdevsim`` is a test driver which can be used to exercise driver
configuration APIs without requiring capable hardware.
Mock-ups and tests based on ``netdevsim`` are strongly encouraged when
adding new APIs, but ``netdevsim`` in itself is **not** considered
a use case/user. You must also implement the new APIs in a real driver.

We give no guarantees that ``netdevsim`` won't change in the future
in a way which would break what would normally be considered uAPI.

``netdevsim`` is reserved for use by upstream tests only, so any
new ``netdevsim`` features must be accompanied by selftests under
``tools/testing/selftests/``.

Reviewer guidance
-----------------

Reviewing other people's patches on the list is highly encouraged,
regardless of the level of expertise. For general guidance and
helpful tips please see :ref:`development_advancedtopics_reviews`.

It's safe to assume that netdev maintainers know the community and the level
of expertise of the reviewers. The reviewers should not be concerned about
their comments impeding or derailing the patch flow.

Less experienced reviewers are highly encouraged to do more in-depth
review of submissions and not focus exclusively on trivial or subjective
matters like code formatting, tags etc.

Testimonials / feedback
-----------------------

Some companies use peer feedback in employee performance reviews.
Please feel free to request feedback from netdev maintainers,
especially if you spend significant amount of time reviewing code
and go out of your way to improve shared infrastructure.

The feedback must be requested by you, the contributor, and will always
be shared with you (even if you request for it to be submitted to your
manager).
.. _pgpguide:

===========================
Kernel Maintainer PGP guide
===========================

:Author: Konstantin Ryabitsev <konstantin@linuxfoundation.org>

This document is aimed at Linux kernel developers, and especially at
subsystem maintainers. It contains a subset of information discussed in
the more general "`Protecting Code Integrity`_" guide published by the
Linux Foundation. Please read that document for more in-depth discussion
on some of the topics mentioned in this guide.

.. _`Protecting Code Integrity`: https://github.com/lfit/itpol/blob/master/protecting-code-integrity.md

The role of PGP in Linux Kernel development
===========================================

PGP helps ensure the integrity of the code that is produced by the Linux
kernel development community and, to a lesser degree, establish trusted
communication channels between developers via PGP-signed email exchange.

The Linux kernel source code is available in two main formats:

- Distributed source repositories (git)
- Periodic release snapshots (tarballs)

Both git repositories and tarballs carry PGP signatures of the kernel
developers who create official kernel releases. These signatures offer a
cryptographic guarantee that downloadable versions made available via
kernel.org or any other mirrors are identical to what these developers
have on their workstations. To this end:

- git repositories provide PGP signatures on all tags
- tarballs provide detached PGP signatures with all downloads

.. _devs_not_infra:

Trusting the developers, not infrastructure
-------------------------------------------

Ever since the 2011 compromise of core kernel.org systems, the main
operating principle of the Kernel Archives project has been to assume
that any part of the infrastructure can be compromised at any time. For
this reason, the administrators have taken deliberate steps to emphasize
that trust must always be placed with developers and never with the code
hosting infrastructure, regardless of how good the security practices
for the latter may be.

The above guiding principle is the reason why this guide is needed. We
want to make sure that by placing trust into developers we do not simply
shift the blame for potential future security incidents to someone else.
The goal is to provide a set of guidelines developers can use to create
a secure working environment and safeguard the PGP keys used to
establish the integrity of the Linux kernel itself.

.. _pgp_tools:

PGP tools
=========

Use GnuPG 2.2 or later
----------------------

Your distro should already have GnuPG installed by default, you just
need to verify that you are using a reasonably recent version of it.
To check, run::

    $ gpg --version | head -n1

If you have version 2.2 or above, then you are good to go. If you have a
version that is prior than 2.2, then some commands from this guide may
not work.

Configure gpg-agent options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The GnuPG agent is a helper tool that will start automatically whenever
you use the ``gpg`` command and run in the background with the purpose
of caching the private key passphrase. There are two options you should
know in order to tweak when the passphrase should be expired from cache:

- ``default-cache-ttl`` (seconds): If you use the same key again before
  the time-to-live expires, the countdown will reset for another period.
  The default is 600 (10 minutes).
- ``max-cache-ttl`` (seconds): Regardless of how recently you've used
  the key since initial passphrase entry, if the maximum time-to-live
  countdown expires, you'll have to enter the passphrase again. The
  default is 30 minutes.

If you find either of these defaults too short (or too long), you can
edit your ``~/.gnupg/gpg-agent.conf`` file to set your own values::

    # set to 30 minutes for regular ttl, and 2 hours for max ttl
    default-cache-ttl 1800
    max-cache-ttl 7200

.. note::

    It is no longer necessary to start gpg-agent manually at the
    beginning of your shell session. You may want to check your rc files
    to remove anything you had in place for older versions of GnuPG, as
    it may not be doing the right thing any more.

.. _protect_your_key:

Protect your PGP key
====================

This guide assumes that you already have a PGP key that you use for Linux
kernel development purposes. If you do not yet have one, please see the
"`Protecting Code Integrity`_" document mentioned earlier for guidance
on how to create a new one.

You should also make a new key if your current one is weaker than 2048
bits (RSA).

Understanding PGP Subkeys
-------------------------

A PGP key rarely consists of a single keypair -- usually it is a
collection of independent subkeys that can be used for different
purposes based on their capabilities, assigned at their creation time.
PGP defines four capabilities that a key can have:

- **[S]** keys can be used for signing
- **[E]** keys can be used for encryption
- **[A]** keys can be used for authentication
- **[C]** keys can be used for certifying other keys

The key with the **[C]** capability is often called the "master" key,
but this terminology is misleading because it implies that the Certify
key can be used in place of any of other subkey on the same chain (like
a physical "master key" can be used to open locks made for other keys).
Since this is not the case, this guide will refer to it as "the Certify
key" to avoid any ambiguity.

It is critical to fully understand the following:

1. All subkeys are fully independent from each other. If you lose a
   private subkey, it cannot be restored or recreated from any other
   private key on your chain.
2. With the exception of the Certify key, there can be multiple subkeys
   with identical capabilities (e.g. you can have 2 valid encryption
   subkeys, 3 valid signing subkeys, but only one valid certification
   subkey). All subkeys are fully independent -- a message encrypted to
   one **[E]** subkey cannot be decrypted with any other **[E]** subkey
   you may also have.
3. A single subkey may have multiple capabilities (e.g. your **[C]** key
   can also be your **[S]** key).

The key carrying the **[C]** (certify) capability is the only key that
can be used to indicate relationship with other keys. Only the **[C]**
key can be used to:

- add or revoke other keys (subkeys) with S/E/A capabilities
- add, change or revoke identities (uids) associated with the key
- add or change the expiration date on itself or any subkey
- sign other people's keys for web of trust purposes

By default, GnuPG creates the following when generating new keys:

- One subkey carrying both Certify and Sign capabilities (**[SC]**)
- A separate subkey with the Encryption capability (**[E]**)

If you used the default parameters when generating your key, then that
is what you will have. You can verify by running ``gpg --list-secret-keys``,
for example::

    sec   ed25519 2022-12-20 [SC] [expires: 2024-12-19]
          000000000000000000000000AAAABBBBCCCCDDDD
    uid           [ultimate] Alice Dev <adev@kernel.org>
    ssb   cv25519 2022-12-20 [E] [expires: 2024-12-19]

The long line under the ``sec`` entry is your key fingerprint --
whenever you see ``[fpr]`` in the examples below, that 40-character
string is what it refers to.

Ensure your passphrase is strong
--------------------------------

GnuPG uses passphrases to encrypt your private keys before storing them on
disk. This way, even if your ``.gnupg`` directory is leaked or stolen in
its entirety, the attackers cannot use your private keys without first
obtaining the passphrase to decrypt them.

It is absolutely essential that your private keys are protected by a
strong passphrase. To set it or change it, use::

    $ gpg --change-passphrase [fpr]

Create a separate Signing subkey
--------------------------------

Our goal is to protect your Certify key by moving it to offline media,
so if you only have a combined **[SC]** key, then you should create a
separate signing subkey::

    $ gpg --quick-addkey [fpr] ed25519 sign

.. note:: ECC support in GnuPG

    Note, that if you intend to use a hardware token that does not
    support ED25519 ECC keys, you should choose "nistp256" instead or
    "ed25519." See the section below on recommended hardware devices.


Back up your Certify key for disaster recovery
----------------------------------------------

The more signatures you have on your PGP key from other developers, the
more reasons you have to create a backup version that lives on something
other than digital media, for disaster recovery reasons.

The best way to create a printable hardcopy of your private key is by
using the ``paperkey`` software written for this very purpose. See ``man
paperkey`` for more details on the output format and its benefits over
other solutions. Paperkey should already be packaged for most
distributions.

Run the following command to create a hardcopy backup of your private
key::

    $ gpg --export-secret-key [fpr] | paperkey -o /tmp/key-backup.txt

Print out that file (or pipe the output straight to lpr), then take a
pen and write your passphrase on the margin of the paper. **This is
strongly recommended** because the key printout is still encrypted with
that passphrase, and if you ever change it you will not remember what it
used to be when you had created the backup -- *guaranteed*.

Put the resulting printout and the hand-written passphrase into an envelope
and store in a secure and well-protected place, preferably away from your
home, such as your bank vault.

.. note::

    Your printer is probably no longer a simple dumb device connected to
    your parallel port, but since the output is still encrypted with
    your passphrase, printing out even to "cloud-integrated" modern
    printers should remain a relatively safe operation.

Back up your whole GnuPG directory
----------------------------------

.. warning::

    **!!!Do not skip this step!!!**

It is important to have a readily available backup of your PGP keys
should you need to recover them. This is different from the
disaster-level preparedness we did with ``paperkey``. You will also rely
on these external copies whenever you need to use your Certify key --
such as when making changes to your own key or signing other people's
keys after conferences and summits.

Start by getting a small USB "thumb" drive (preferably two!) that you
will use for backup purposes. You will need to encrypt them using LUKS
-- refer to your distro's documentation on how to accomplish this.

For the encryption passphrase, you can use the same one as on your
PGP key.

Once the encryption process is over, re-insert the USB drive and make
sure it gets properly mounted. Copy your entire ``.gnupg`` directory
over to the encrypted storage::

    $ cp -a ~/.gnupg /media/disk/foo/gnupg-backup

You should now test to make sure everything still works::

    $ gpg --homedir=/media/disk/foo/gnupg-backup --list-key [fpr]

If you don't get any errors, then you should be good to go. Unmount the
USB drive, distinctly label it so you don't blow it away next time you
need to use a random USB drive, and put in a safe place -- but not too
far away, because you'll need to use it every now and again for things
like editing identities, adding or revoking subkeys, or signing other
people's keys.

Remove the Certify key from your homedir
----------------------------------------

The files in our home directory are not as well protected as we like to
think.  They can be leaked or stolen via many different means:

- by accident when making quick homedir copies to set up a new workstation
- by systems administrator negligence or malice
- via poorly secured backups
- via malware in desktop apps (browsers, pdf viewers, etc)
- via coercion when crossing international borders

Protecting your key with a good passphrase greatly helps reduce the risk
of any of the above, but passphrases can be discovered via keyloggers,
shoulder-surfing, or any number of other means. For this reason, the
recommended setup is to remove your Certify key from your home directory
and store it on offline storage.

.. warning::

    Please see the previous section and make sure you have backed up
    your GnuPG directory in its entirety. What we are about to do will
    render your key useless if you do not have a usable backup!

First, identify the keygrip of your Certify key::

    $ gpg --with-keygrip --list-key [fpr]

The output will be something like this::

    pub   ed25519 2022-12-20 [SC] [expires: 2022-12-19]
          000000000000000000000000AAAABBBBCCCCDDDD
          Keygrip = 1111000000000000000000000000000000000000
    uid           [ultimate] Alice Dev <adev@kernel.org>
    sub   cv25519 2022-12-20 [E] [expires: 2022-12-19]
          Keygrip = 2222000000000000000000000000000000000000
    sub   ed25519 2022-12-20 [S]
          Keygrip = 3333000000000000000000000000000000000000

Find the keygrip entry that is beneath the ``pub`` line (right under the
Certify key fingerprint). This will correspond directly to a file in your
``~/.gnupg`` directory::

    $ cd ~/.gnupg/private-keys-v1.d
    $ ls
    1111000000000000000000000000000000000000.key
    2222000000000000000000000000000000000000.key
    3333000000000000000000000000000000000000.key

All you have to do is simply remove the .key file that corresponds to
the Certify key keygrip::

    $ cd ~/.gnupg/private-keys-v1.d
    $ rm 1111000000000000000000000000000000000000.key

Now, if you issue the ``--list-secret-keys`` command, it will show that
the Certify key is missing (the ``#`` indicates it is not available)::

    $ gpg --list-secret-keys
    sec#  ed25519 2022-12-20 [SC] [expires: 2024-12-19]
          000000000000000000000000AAAABBBBCCCCDDDD
    uid           [ultimate] Alice Dev <adev@kernel.org>
    ssb   cv25519 2022-12-20 [E] [expires: 2024-12-19]
    ssb   ed25519 2022-12-20 [S]

You should also remove any ``secring.gpg`` files in the ``~/.gnupg``
directory, which may be left over from previous versions of GnuPG.

If you don't have the "private-keys-v1.d" directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you do not have a ``~/.gnupg/private-keys-v1.d`` directory, then your
secret keys are still stored in the legacy ``secring.gpg`` file used by
GnuPG v1. Making any changes to your key, such as changing the
passphrase or adding a subkey, should automatically convert the old
``secring.gpg`` format to use ``private-keys-v1.d`` instead.

Once you get that done, make sure to delete the obsolete ``secring.gpg``
file, which still contains your private keys.

.. _smartcards:

Move the subkeys to a dedicated crypto device
=============================================

Even though the Certify key is now safe from being leaked or stolen, the
subkeys are still in your home directory. Anyone who manages to get
their hands on those will be able to decrypt your communication or fake
your signatures (if they know the passphrase). Furthermore, each time a
GnuPG operation is performed, the keys are loaded into system memory and
can be stolen from there by sufficiently advanced malware (think
Meltdown and Spectre).

The best way to completely protect your keys is to move them to a
specialized hardware device that is capable of smartcard operations.

The benefits of smartcards
--------------------------

A smartcard contains a cryptographic chip that is capable of storing
private keys and performing crypto operations directly on the card
itself. Because the key contents never leave the smartcard, the
operating system of the computer into which you plug in the hardware
device is not able to retrieve the private keys themselves. This is very
different from the encrypted USB storage device we used earlier for
backup purposes -- while that USB device is plugged in and mounted, the
operating system is able to access the private key contents.

Using external encrypted USB media is not a substitute to having a
smartcard-capable device.

Available smartcard devices
---------------------------

Unless all your laptops and workstations have smartcard readers, the
easiest is to get a specialized USB device that implements smartcard
functionality. There are several options available:

- `Nitrokey Start`_: Open hardware and Free Software, based on FSI
  Japan's `Gnuk`_. One of the few available commercial devices that
  support ED25519 ECC keys, but offer fewest security features (such as
  resistance to tampering or some side-channel attacks).
- `Nitrokey Pro 2`_: Similar to the Nitrokey Start, but more
  tamper-resistant and offers more security features. Pro 2 supports ECC
  cryptography (NISTP).
- `Yubikey 5`_: proprietary hardware and software, but cheaper than
  Nitrokey Pro and comes available in the USB-C form that is more useful
  with newer laptops. Offers additional security features such as FIDO
  U2F, among others, and now finally supports NISTP and ED25519 ECC
  keys.

Your choice will depend on cost, shipping availability in your
geographical region, and open/proprietary hardware considerations.

.. note::

    If you are listed in MAINTAINERS or have an account at kernel.org,
    you `qualify for a free Nitrokey Start`_ courtesy of The Linux
    Foundation.

.. _`Nitrokey Start`: https://shop.nitrokey.com/shop/product/nitrokey-start-6
.. _`Nitrokey Pro 2`: https://shop.nitrokey.com/shop/product/nkpr2-nitrokey-pro-2-3
.. _`Yubikey 5`: https://www.yubico.com/products/yubikey-5-overview/
.. _Gnuk: https://www.fsij.org/doc-gnuk/
.. _`qualify for a free Nitrokey Start`: https://www.kernel.org/nitrokey-digital-tokens-for-kernel-developers.html

Configure your smartcard device
-------------------------------

Your smartcard device should Just Work (TM) the moment you plug it into
any modern Linux workstation. You can verify it by running::

    $ gpg --card-status

If you see full smartcard details, then you are good to go.
Unfortunately, troubleshooting all possible reasons why things may not
be working for you is way beyond the scope of this guide. If you are
having trouble getting the card to work with GnuPG, please seek help via
usual support channels.

To configure your smartcard, you will need to use the GnuPG menu system, as
there are no convenient command-line switches::

    $ gpg --card-edit
    [...omitted...]
    gpg/card> admin
    Admin commands are allowed
    gpg/card> passwd

You should set the user PIN (1), Admin PIN (3), and the Reset Code (4).
Please make sure to record and store these in a safe place -- especially
the Admin PIN and the Reset Code (which allows you to completely wipe
the smartcard). You so rarely need to use the Admin PIN, that you will
inevitably forget what it is if you do not record it.

Getting back to the main card menu, you can also set other values (such
as name, sex, login data, etc), but it's not necessary and will
additionally leak information about your smartcard should you lose it.

.. note::

    Despite having the name "PIN", neither the user PIN nor the admin
    PIN on the card need to be numbers.

.. warning::

    Some devices may require that you move the subkeys onto the device
    before you can change the passphrase. Please check the documentation
    provided by the device manufacturer.

Move the subkeys to your smartcard
----------------------------------

Exit the card menu (using "q") and save all changes. Next, let's move
your subkeys onto the smartcard. You will need both your PGP key
passphrase and the admin PIN of the card for most operations::

    $ gpg --edit-key [fpr]

    Secret subkeys are available.

    pub  ed25519/AAAABBBBCCCCDDDD
         created: 2022-12-20  expires: 2024-12-19  usage: SC
         trust: ultimate      validity: ultimate
    ssb  cv25519/1111222233334444
         created: 2022-12-20  expires: never       usage: E
    ssb  ed25519/5555666677778888
         created: 2017-12-07  expires: never       usage: S
    [ultimate] (1). Alice Dev <adev@kernel.org>

    gpg>

Using ``--edit-key`` puts us into the menu mode again, and you will
notice that the key listing is a little different. From here on, all
commands are done from inside this menu mode, as indicated by ``gpg>``.

First, let's select the key we'll be putting onto the card -- you do
this by typing ``key 1`` (it's the first one in the listing, the **[E]**
subkey)::

    gpg> key 1

In the output, you should now see ``ssb*`` on the **[E]** key. The ``*``
indicates which key is currently "selected." It works as a *toggle*,
meaning that if you type ``key 1`` again, the ``*`` will disappear and
the key will not be selected any more.

Now, let's move that key onto the smartcard::

    gpg> keytocard
    Please select where to store the key:
       (2) Encryption key
    Your selection? 2

Since it's our **[E]** key, it makes sense to put it into the Encryption
slot.  When you submit your selection, you will be prompted first for
your PGP key passphrase, and then for the admin PIN. If the command
returns without an error, your key has been moved.

**Important**: Now type ``key 1`` again to unselect the first key, and
``key 2`` to select the **[S]** key::

    gpg> key 1
    gpg> key 2
    gpg> keytocard
    Please select where to store the key:
       (1) Signature key
       (3) Authentication key
    Your selection? 1

You can use the **[S]** key both for Signature and Authentication, but
we want to make sure it's in the Signature slot, so choose (1). Once
again, if your command returns without an error, then the operation was
successful::

    gpg> q
    Save changes? (y/N) y

Saving the changes will delete the keys you moved to the card from your
home directory (but it's okay, because we have them in our backups
should we need to do this again for a replacement smartcard).

Verifying that the keys were moved
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you perform ``--list-secret-keys`` now, you will see a subtle
difference in the output::

    $ gpg --list-secret-keys
    sec#  ed25519 2022-12-20 [SC] [expires: 2024-12-19]
          000000000000000000000000AAAABBBBCCCCDDDD
    uid           [ultimate] Alice Dev <adev@kernel.org>
    ssb>  cv25519 2022-12-20 [E] [expires: 2024-12-19]
    ssb>  ed25519 2022-12-20 [S]

The ``>`` in the ``ssb>`` output indicates that the subkey is only
available on the smartcard. If you go back into your secret keys
directory and look at the contents there, you will notice that the
``.key`` files there have been replaced with stubs::

    $ cd ~/.gnupg/private-keys-v1.d
    $ strings *.key | grep 'private-key'

The output should contain ``shadowed-private-key`` to indicate that
these files are only stubs and the actual content is on the smartcard.

Verifying that the smartcard is functioning
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To verify that the smartcard is working as intended, you can create a
signature::

    $ echo "Hello world" | gpg --clearsign > /tmp/test.asc
    $ gpg --verify /tmp/test.asc

This should ask for your smartcard PIN on your first command, and then
show "Good signature" after you run ``gpg --verify``.

Congratulations, you have successfully made it extremely difficult to
steal your digital developer identity!

Other common GnuPG operations
-----------------------------

Here is a quick reference for some common operations you'll need to do
with your PGP key.

Mounting your safe offline storage
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will need your Certify key for any of the operations below, so you
will first need to mount your backup offline storage and tell GnuPG to
use it::

    $ export GNUPGHOME=/media/disk/foo/gnupg-backup
    $ gpg --list-secret-keys

You want to make sure that you see ``sec`` and not ``sec#`` in the
output (the ``#`` means the key is not available and you're still using
your regular home directory location).

Extending key expiration date
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Certify key has the default expiration date of 2 years from the date
of creation. This is done both for security reasons and to make obsolete
keys eventually disappear from keyservers.

To extend the expiration on your key by a year from current date, just
run::

    $ gpg --quick-set-expire [fpr] 1y

You can also use a specific date if that is easier to remember (e.g.
your birthday, January 1st, or Canada Day)::

    $ gpg --quick-set-expire [fpr] 2025-07-01

Remember to send the updated key back to keyservers::

    $ gpg --send-key [fpr]

Updating your work directory after any changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After you make any changes to your key using the offline storage, you will
want to import these changes back into your regular working directory::

    $ gpg --export | gpg --homedir ~/.gnupg --import
    $ unset GNUPGHOME

Using gpg-agent over ssh
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can forward your gpg-agent over ssh if you need to sign tags or
commits on a remote system. Please refer to the instructions provided
on the GnuPG wiki:

- `Agent Forwarding over SSH`_

It works more smoothly if you can modify the sshd server settings on the
remote end.

.. _`Agent Forwarding over SSH`: https://wiki.gnupg.org/AgentForwarding

.. _pgp_with_git:

Using PGP with Git
==================

One of the core features of Git is its decentralized nature -- once a
repository is cloned to your system, you have full history of the
project, including all of its tags, commits and branches. However, with
hundreds of cloned repositories floating around, how does anyone verify
that their copy of linux.git has not been tampered with by a malicious
third party?

Or what happens if a backdoor is discovered in the code and the "Author"
line in the commit says it was done by you, while you're pretty sure you
had `nothing to do with it`_?

To address both of these issues, Git introduced PGP integration. Signed
tags prove the repository integrity by assuring that its contents are
exactly the same as on the workstation of the developer who created the
tag, while signed commits make it nearly impossible for someone to
impersonate you without having access to your PGP keys.

.. _`nothing to do with it`: https://github.com/jayphelps/git-blame-someone-else

Configure git to use your PGP key
---------------------------------

If you only have one secret key in your keyring, then you don't really
need to do anything extra, as it becomes your default key.  However, if
you happen to have multiple secret keys, you can tell git which key
should be used (``[fpr]`` is the fingerprint of your key)::

    $ git config --global user.signingKey [fpr]

How to work with signed tags
----------------------------

To create a signed tag, simply pass the ``-s`` switch to the tag
command::

    $ git tag -s [tagname]

Our recommendation is to always sign git tags, as this allows other
developers to ensure that the git repository they are pulling from has
not been maliciously altered.

How to verify signed tags
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To verify a signed tag, simply use the ``verify-tag`` command::

    $ git verify-tag [tagname]

If you are pulling a tag from another fork of the project repository,
git should automatically verify the signature at the tip you're pulling
and show you the results during the merge operation::

    $ git pull [url] tags/sometag

The merge message will contain something like this::

    Merge tag 'sometag' of [url]

    [Tag message]

    # gpg: Signature made [...]
    # gpg: Good signature from [...]

If you are verifying someone else's git tag, then you will need to
import their PGP key. Please refer to the
":ref:`verify_identities`" section below.

Configure git to always sign annotated tags
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Chances are, if you're creating an annotated tag, you'll want to sign
it. To force git to always sign annotated tags, you can set a global
configuration option::

    $ git config --global tag.forceSignAnnotated true

How to work with signed commits
-------------------------------

It is easy to create signed commits, but it is much more difficult to
use them in Linux kernel development, since it relies on patches sent to
the mailing list, and this workflow does not preserve PGP commit
signatures. Furthermore, when rebasing your repository to match
upstream, even your own PGP commit signatures will end up discarded. For
this reason, most kernel developers don't bother signing their commits
and will ignore signed commits in any external repositories that they
rely upon in their work.

However, if you have your working git tree publicly available at some
git hosting service (kernel.org, infradead.org, ozlabs.org, or others),
then the recommendation is that you sign all your git commits even if
upstream developers do not directly benefit from this practice.

We recommend this for the following reasons:

1. Should there ever be a need to perform code forensics or track code
   provenance, even externally maintained trees carrying PGP commit
   signatures will be valuable for such purposes.
2. If you ever need to re-clone your local repository (for example,
   after a disk failure), this lets you easily verify the repository
   integrity before resuming your work.
3. If someone needs to cherry-pick your commits, this allows them to
   quickly verify their integrity before applying them.

Creating signed commits
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create a signed commit, you just need to pass the ``-S`` flag to the
``git commit`` command (it's capital ``-S`` due to collision with
another flag)::

    $ git commit -S

Configure git to always sign commits
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can tell git to always sign commits::

    git config --global commit.gpgSign true

.. note::

    Make sure you configure ``gpg-agent`` before you turn this on.

.. _verify_identities:


How to work with signed patches
-------------------------------

It is possible to use your PGP key to sign patches sent to kernel
developer mailing lists. Since existing email signature mechanisms
(PGP-Mime or PGP-inline) tend to cause problems with regular code
review tasks, you should use the tool kernel.org created for this
purpose that puts cryptographic attestation signatures into message
headers (a-la DKIM):

- `Patatt Patch Attestation`_

.. _`Patatt Patch Attestation`: https://pypi.org/project/patatt/

Installing and configuring patatt
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Patatt is packaged for many distributions already, so please check there
first. You can also install it from pypi using "``pip install patatt``".

If you already have your PGP key configured with git (via the
``user.signingKey`` configuration parameter), then patatt requires no
further configuration. You can start signing your patches by installing
the git-send-email hook in the repository you want::

    patatt install-hook

Now any patches you send with ``git send-email`` will be automatically
signed with your cryptographic signature.

Checking patatt signatures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are using ``b4`` to retrieve and apply patches, then it will
automatically attempt to verify all DKIM and patatt signatures it
encounters, for example::

    $ b4 am 20220720205013.890942-1-broonie@kernel.org
    [...]
    Checking attestation on all messages, may take a moment...
    ---
      ✓ [PATCH v1 1/3] kselftest/arm64: Correct buffer allocation for SVE Z registers
      ✓ [PATCH v1 2/3] arm64/sve: Document our actual ABI for clearing registers on syscall
      ✓ [PATCH v1 3/3] kselftest/arm64: Enforce actual ABI for SVE syscalls
      ---
      ✓ Signed: openpgp/broonie@kernel.org
      ✓ Signed: DKIM/kernel.org

.. note::

    Patatt and b4 are still in active development and you should check
    the latest documentation for these projects for any new or updated
    features.

.. _kernel_identities:

How to verify kernel developer identities
=========================================

Signing tags and commits is easy, but how does one go about verifying
that the key used to sign something belongs to the actual kernel
developer and not to a malicious imposter?

Configure auto-key-retrieval using WKD and DANE
-----------------------------------------------

If you are not already someone with an extensive collection of other
developers' public keys, then you can jumpstart your keyring by relying
on key auto-discovery and auto-retrieval. GnuPG can piggyback on other
delegated trust technologies, namely DNSSEC and TLS, to get you going if
the prospect of starting your own Web of Trust from scratch is too
daunting.

Add the following to your ``~/.gnupg/gpg.conf``::

    auto-key-locate wkd,dane,local
    auto-key-retrieve

DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities ("DANE") is a method for
publishing public keys in DNS and securing them using DNSSEC signed
zones. Web Key Directory ("WKD") is the alternative method that uses
https lookups for the same purpose. When using either DANE or WKD for
looking up public keys, GnuPG will validate DNSSEC or TLS certificates,
respectively, before adding auto-retrieved public keys to your local
keyring.

Kernel.org publishes the WKD for all developers who have kernel.org
accounts. Once you have the above changes in your ``gpg.conf``, you can
auto-retrieve the keys for Linus Torvalds and Greg Kroah-Hartman (if you
don't already have them)::

    $ gpg --locate-keys torvalds@kernel.org gregkh@kernel.org

If you have a kernel.org account, then you should `add the kernel.org
UID to your key`_ to make WKD more useful to other kernel developers.

.. _`add the kernel.org UID to your key`: https://korg.wiki.kernel.org/userdoc/mail#adding_a_kernelorg_uid_to_your_pgp_key

Web of Trust (WOT) vs. Trust on First Use (TOFU)
------------------------------------------------

PGP incorporates a trust delegation mechanism known as the "Web of
Trust." At its core, this is an attempt to replace the need for
centralized Certification Authorities of the HTTPS/TLS world. Instead of
various software makers dictating who should be your trusted certifying
entity, PGP leaves this responsibility to each user.

Unfortunately, very few people understand how the Web of Trust works.
While it remains an important aspect of the OpenPGP specification,
recent versions of GnuPG (2.2 and above) have implemented an alternative
mechanism called "Trust on First Use" (TOFU). You can think of TOFU as
"the SSH-like approach to trust." With SSH, the first time you connect
to a remote system, its key fingerprint is recorded and remembered. If
the key changes in the future, the SSH client will alert you and refuse
to connect, forcing you to make a decision on whether you choose to
trust the changed key or not. Similarly, the first time you import
someone's PGP key, it is assumed to be valid. If at any point in the
future GnuPG comes across another key with the same identity, both the
previously imported key and the new key will be marked as invalid and
you will need to manually figure out which one to keep.

We recommend that you use the combined TOFU+PGP trust model (which is
the new default in GnuPG v2). To set it, add (or modify) the
``trust-model`` setting in ``~/.gnupg/gpg.conf``::

    trust-model tofu+pgp

Using the kernel.org web of trust repository
--------------------------------------------

Kernel.org maintains a git repository with developers' public keys as a
replacement for replicating keyserver networks that have gone mostly
dark in the past few years. The full documentation for how to set up
that repository as your source of public keys can be found here:

- `Kernel developer PGP Keyring`_

If you are a kernel developer, please consider submitting your key for
inclusion into that keyring.

.. _`Kernel developer PGP Keyring`: https://korg.docs.kernel.org/pgpkeys.html
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

==============================================
SoC Platforms with DTS Compliance Requirements
==============================================

Overview
--------

SoC platforms or subarchitectures should follow all the rules from
Documentation/process/maintainer-soc.rst.  This document referenced in
MAINTAINERS impose additional requirements listed below.

Strict DTS DT Schema and dtc Compliance
---------------------------------------

No changes to the SoC platform Devicetree sources (DTS files) should introduce
new ``make dtbs_check W=1`` warnings.  Warnings in a new board DTS, which are
results of issues in an included DTSI file, are considered existing, not new
warnings.  The platform maintainers have automation in place which should point
out any new warnings.

If a commit introducing new warnings gets accepted somehow, the resulting
issues shall be fixed in reasonable time (e.g. within one release) or the
commit reverted.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=============
SoC Subsystem
=============

Overview
--------

The SoC subsystem is a place of aggregation for SoC-specific code.
The main components of the subsystem are:

* devicetrees for 32- & 64-bit ARM and RISC-V
* 32-bit ARM board files (arch/arm/mach*)
* 32- & 64-bit ARM defconfigs
* SoC-specific drivers across architectures, in particular for 32- & 64-bit
  ARM, RISC-V and Loongarch

These "SoC-specific drivers" do not include clock, GPIO etc drivers that have
other top-level maintainers. The drivers/soc/ directory is generally meant
for kernel-internal drivers that are used by other drivers to provide SoC-
specific functionality like identifying an SoC revision or interfacing with
power domains.

The SoC subsystem also serves as an intermediate location for changes to
drivers/bus, drivers/firmware, drivers/reset and drivers/memory.  The addition
of new platforms, or the removal of existing ones, often go through the SoC
tree as a dedicated branch covering multiple subsystems.

The main SoC tree is housed on git.kernel.org:
  https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/soc/soc.git/

Maintainers
-----------

Clearly this is quite a wide range of topics, which no one person, or even
small group of people are capable of maintaining.  Instead, the SoC subsystem
is comprised of many submaintainers (platform maintainers), each taking care of
individual platforms and driver subdirectories.
In this regard, "platform" usually refers to a series of SoCs from a given
vendor, for example, Nvidia's series of Tegra SoCs.  Many submaintainers operate
on a vendor level, responsible for multiple product lines.  For several reasons,
including acquisitions/different business units in a company, things vary
significantly here.  The various submaintainers are documented in the
MAINTAINERS file.

Most of these submaintainers have their own trees where they stage patches,
sending pull requests to the main SoC tree.  These trees are usually, but not
always, listed in MAINTAINERS.

What the SoC tree is not, however, is a location for architecture-specific code
changes.  Each architecture has its own maintainers that are responsible for
architectural details, CPU errata and the like.

Submitting Patches for Given SoC
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All typical platform related patches should be sent via SoC submaintainers
(platform-specific maintainers).  This includes also changes to per-platform or
shared defconfigs (scripts/get_maintainer.pl might not provide correct
addresses in such case).

Submitting Patches to the Main SoC Maintainers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The main SoC maintainers can be reached via the alias soc@kernel.org only in
following cases:

1. There are no platform-specific maintainers.

2. Platform-specific maintainers are unresponsive.

3. Introducing a completely new SoC platform.  Such new SoC work should be sent
   first to common mailing lists, pointed out by scripts/get_maintainer.pl, for
   community review.  After positive community review, work should be sent to
   soc@kernel.org in one patchset containing new arch/foo/Kconfig entry, DTS
   files, MAINTAINERS file entry and optionally initial drivers with their
   Devicetree bindings.  The MAINTAINERS file entry should list new
   platform-specific maintainers, who are going to be responsible for handling
   patches for the platform from now on.

Note that the soc@kernel.org is usually not the place to discuss the patches,
thus work sent to this address should be already considered as acceptable by
the community.

Information for (new) Submaintainers
------------------------------------

As new platforms spring up, they often bring with them new submaintainers,
many of whom work for the silicon vendor, and may not be familiar with the
process.

Devicetree ABI Stability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Perhaps one of the most important things to highlight is that dt-bindings
document the ABI between the devicetree and the kernel.
Please read Documentation/devicetree/bindings/ABI.rst.

If changes are being made to a devicetree that are incompatible with old
kernels, the devicetree patch should not be applied until the driver is, or an
appropriate time later.  Most importantly, any incompatible changes should be
clearly pointed out in the patch description and pull request, along with the
expected impact on existing users, such as bootloaders or other operating
systems.

Driver Branch Dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A common problem is synchronizing changes between device drivers and devicetree
files. Even if a change is compatible in both directions, this may require
coordinating how the changes get merged through different maintainer trees.

Usually the branch that includes a driver change will also include the
corresponding change to the devicetree binding description, to ensure they are
in fact compatible.  This means that the devicetree branch can end up causing
warnings in the "make dtbs_check" step.  If a devicetree change depends on
missing additions to a header file in include/dt-bindings/, it will fail the
"make dtbs" step and not get merged.

There are multiple ways to deal with this:

* Avoid defining custom macros in include/dt-bindings/ for hardware constants
  that can be derived from a datasheet -- binding macros in header files should
  only be used as a last resort if there is no natural way to define a binding

* Use literal values in the devicetree file in place of macros even when a
  header is required, and change them to the named representation in a
  following release

* Defer the devicetree changes to a release after the binding and driver have
  already been merged

* Change the bindings in a shared immutable branch that is used as the base for
  both the driver change and the devicetree changes

* Add duplicate defines in the devicetree file guarded by an #ifndef section,
  removing them in a later release

Devicetree Naming Convention
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The general naming scheme for devicetree files is as follows.  The aspects of a
platform that are set at the SoC level, like CPU cores, are contained in a file
named $soc.dtsi, for example, jh7100.dtsi.  Integration details, that will vary
from board to board, are described in $soc-$board.dts.  An example of this is
jh7100-beaglev-starlight.dts.  Often many boards are variations on a theme, and
frequently there are intermediate files, such as jh7100-common.dtsi, which sit
between the $soc.dtsi and $soc-$board.dts files, containing the descriptions of
common hardware.

Some platforms also have System on Modules, containing an SoC, which are then
integrated into several different boards. For these platforms, $soc-$som.dtsi
and $soc-$som-$board.dts are typical.

Directories are usually named after the vendor of the SoC at the time of its
inclusion, leading to some historical directory names in the tree.

Validating Devicetree Files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``make dtbs_check`` can be used to validate that devicetree files are compliant
with the dt-bindings that describe the ABI.  Please read the section
"Running checks" of Documentation/devicetree/bindings/writing-schema.rst for
more information on the validation of devicetrees.

For new platforms, or additions to existing ones, ``make dtbs_check`` should not
add any new warnings.  For RISC-V and Samsung SoC, ``make dtbs_check W=1`` is
required to not add any new warnings.
If in any doubt about a devicetree change, reach out to the devicetree
maintainers.

Branches and Pull Requests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Just as the main SoC tree has several branches, it is expected that
submaintainers will do the same. Driver, defconfig and devicetree changes should
all be split into separate branches and appear in separate pull requests to the
SoC maintainers.  Each branch should be usable by itself and avoid
regressions that originate from dependencies on other branches.

Small sets of patches can also be sent as separate emails to soc@kernel.org,
grouped into the same categories.

If changes do not fit into the normal patterns, there can be additional
top-level branches, e.g. for a treewide rework, or the addition of new SoC
platforms including dts files and drivers.

Branches with a lot of changes can benefit from getting split up into separate
topics branches, even if they end up getting merged into the same branch of the
SoC tree.  An example here would be one branch for devicetree warning fixes, one
for a rework and one for newly added boards.

Another common way to split up changes is to send an early pull request with the
majority of the changes at some point between rc1 and rc4, following up with one
or more smaller pull requests towards the end of the cycle that can add late
changes or address problems identified while testing the first set.

While there is no cut-off time for late pull requests, it helps to only send
small branches as time gets closer to the merge window.

Pull requests for bugfixes for the current release can be sent at any time, but
again having multiple smaller branches is better than trying to combine too many
patches into one pull request.

The subject line of a pull request should begin with "[GIT PULL]" and made using
a signed tag, rather than a branch.  This tag should contain a short description
summarising the changes in the pull request.  For more detail on sending pull
requests, please see Documentation/maintainer/pull-requests.rst.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

The tip tree handbook
=====================

What is the tip tree?
---------------------

The tip tree is a collection of several subsystems and areas of
development. The tip tree is both a direct development tree and a
aggregation tree for several sub-maintainer trees. The tip tree gitweb URL
is: https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/tip/tip.git

The tip tree contains the following subsystems:

   - **x86 architecture**

     The x86 architecture development takes place in the tip tree except
     for the x86 KVM and XEN specific parts which are maintained in the
     corresponding subsystems and routed directly to mainline from
     there. It's still good practice to Cc the x86 maintainers on
     x86-specific KVM and XEN patches.

     Some x86 subsystems have their own maintainers in addition to the
     overall x86 maintainers.  Please Cc the overall x86 maintainers on
     patches touching files in arch/x86 even when they are not called out
     by the MAINTAINER file.

     Note, that ``x86@kernel.org`` is not a mailing list. It is merely a
     mail alias which distributes mails to the x86 top-level maintainer
     team. Please always Cc the Linux Kernel mailing list (LKML)
     ``linux-kernel@vger.kernel.org``, otherwise your mail ends up only in
     the private inboxes of the maintainers.

   - **Scheduler**

     Scheduler development takes place in the -tip tree, in the
     sched/core branch - with occasional sub-topic trees for
     work-in-progress patch-sets.

   - **Locking and atomics**

     Locking development (including atomics and other synchronization
     primitives that are connected to locking) takes place in the -tip
     tree, in the locking/core branch - with occasional sub-topic trees
     for work-in-progress patch-sets.

   - **Generic interrupt subsystem and interrupt chip drivers**:

     - interrupt core development happens in the irq/core branch

     - interrupt chip driver development also happens in the irq/core
       branch, but the patches are usually applied in a separate maintainer
       tree and then aggregated into irq/core

   - **Time, timers, timekeeping, NOHZ and related chip drivers**:

     - timekeeping, clocksource core, NTP and alarmtimer development
       happens in the timers/core branch, but patches are usually applied in
       a separate maintainer tree and then aggregated into timers/core

     - clocksource/event driver development happens in the timers/core
       branch, but patches are mostly applied in a separate maintainer tree
       and then aggregated into timers/core

   - **Performance counters core, architecture support and tooling**:

     - perf core and architecture support development happens in the
       perf/core branch

     - perf tooling development happens in the perf tools maintainer
       tree and is aggregated into the tip tree.

   - **CPU hotplug core**

   - **RAS core**

     Mostly x86-specific RAS patches are collected in the tip ras/core
     branch.

   - **EFI core**

     EFI development in the efi git tree. The collected patches are
     aggregated in the tip efi/core branch.

   - **RCU**

     RCU development happens in the linux-rcu tree. The resulting changes
     are aggregated into the tip core/rcu branch.

   - **Various core code components**:

       - debugobjects

       - objtool

       - random bits and pieces


Patch submission notes
----------------------

Selecting the tree/branch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In general, development against the head of the tip tree master branch is
fine, but for the subsystems which are maintained separately, have their
own git tree and are only aggregated into the tip tree, development should
take place against the relevant subsystem tree or branch.

Bug fixes which target mainline should always be applicable against the
mainline kernel tree. Potential conflicts against changes which are already
queued in the tip tree are handled by the maintainers.

Patch subject
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The tip tree preferred format for patch subject prefixes is
'subsys/component:', e.g. 'x86/apic:', 'x86/mm/fault:', 'sched/fair:',
'genirq/core:'. Please do not use file names or complete file paths as
prefix. 'git log path/to/file' should give you a reasonable hint in most
cases.

The condensed patch description in the subject line should start with a
uppercase letter and should be written in imperative tone.


Changelog
^^^^^^^^^

The general rules about changelogs in the :ref:`Submitting patches guide
<describe_changes>`, apply.

The tip tree maintainers set value on following these rules, especially on
the request to write changelogs in imperative mood and not impersonating
code or the execution of it. This is not just a whim of the
maintainers. Changelogs written in abstract words are more precise and
tend to be less confusing than those written in the form of novels.

It's also useful to structure the changelog into several paragraphs and not
lump everything together into a single one. A good structure is to explain
the context, the problem and the solution in separate paragraphs and this
order.

Examples for illustration:

  Example 1::

    x86/intel_rdt/mbm: Fix MBM overflow handler during hot cpu

    When a CPU is dying, we cancel the worker and schedule a new worker on a
    different CPU on the same domain. But if the timer is already about to
    expire (say 0.99s) then we essentially double the interval.

    We modify the hot cpu handling to cancel the delayed work on the dying
    cpu and run the worker immediately on a different cpu in same domain. We
    do not flush the worker because the MBM overflow worker reschedules the
    worker on same CPU and scans the domain->cpu_mask to get the domain
    pointer.

  Improved version::

    x86/intel_rdt/mbm: Fix MBM overflow handler during CPU hotplug

    When a CPU is dying, the overflow worker is canceled and rescheduled on a
    different CPU in the same domain. But if the timer is already about to
    expire this essentially doubles the interval which might result in a non
    detected overflow.

    Cancel the overflow worker and reschedule it immediately on a different CPU
    in the same domain. The work could be flushed as well, but that would
    reschedule it on the same CPU.

  Example 2::

    time: POSIX CPU timers: Ensure that variable is initialized

    If cpu_timer_sample_group returns -EINVAL, it will not have written into
    *sample. Checking for cpu_timer_sample_group's return value precludes the
    potential use of an uninitialized value of now in the following block.
    Given an invalid clock_idx, the previous code could otherwise overwrite
    *oldval in an undefined manner. This is now prevented. We also exploit
    short-circuiting of && to sample the timer only if the result will
    actually be used to update *oldval.

  Improved version::

    posix-cpu-timers: Make set_process_cpu_timer() more robust

    Because the return value of cpu_timer_sample_group() is not checked,
    compilers and static checkers can legitimately warn about a potential use
    of the uninitialized variable 'now'. This is not a runtime issue as all
    call sites hand in valid clock ids.

    Also cpu_timer_sample_group() is invoked unconditionally even when the
    result is not used because *oldval is NULL.

    Make the invocation conditional and check the return value.

  Example 3::

    The entity can also be used for other purposes.

    Let's rename it to be more generic.

  Improved version::

    The entity can also be used for other purposes.

    Rename it to be more generic.


For complex scenarios, especially race conditions and memory ordering
issues, it is valuable to depict the scenario with a table which shows
the parallelism and the temporal order of events. Here is an example::

    CPU0                            CPU1
    free_irq(X)                     interrupt X
                                    spin_lock(desc->lock)
                                    wake irq thread()
                                    spin_unlock(desc->lock)
    spin_lock(desc->lock)
    remove action()
    shutdown_irq()
    release_resources()             thread_handler()
    spin_unlock(desc->lock)           access released resources.
                                      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    synchronize_irq()

Lockdep provides similar useful output to depict a possible deadlock
scenario::

    CPU0                                    CPU1
    rtmutex_lock(&rcu->rt_mutex)
      spin_lock(&rcu->rt_mutex.wait_lock)
                                            local_irq_disable()
                                            spin_lock(&timer->it_lock)
                                            spin_lock(&rcu->mutex.wait_lock)
    --> Interrupt
        spin_lock(&timer->it_lock)


Function references in changelogs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a function is mentioned in the changelog, either the text body or the
subject line, please use the format 'function_name()'. Omitting the
brackets after the function name can be ambiguous::

  Subject: subsys/component: Make reservation_count static

  reservation_count is only used in reservation_stats. Make it static.

The variant with brackets is more precise::

  Subject: subsys/component: Make reservation_count() static

  reservation_count() is only called from reservation_stats(). Make it
  static.


Backtraces in changelogs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

See :ref:`backtraces`.

Ordering of commit tags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To have a uniform view of the commit tags, the tip maintainers use the
following tag ordering scheme:

 - Fixes: 12char-SHA1 ("sub/sys: Original subject line")

   A Fixes tag should be added even for changes which do not need to be
   backported to stable kernels, i.e. when addressing a recently introduced
   issue which only affects tip or the current head of mainline. These tags
   are helpful to identify the original commit and are much more valuable
   than prominently mentioning the commit which introduced a problem in the
   text of the changelog itself because they can be automatically
   extracted.

   The following example illustrates the difference::

     Commit

       abcdef012345678 ("x86/xxx: Replace foo with bar")

     left an unused instance of variable foo around. Remove it.

     Signed-off-by: J.Dev <j.dev@mail>

   Please say instead::

     The recent replacement of foo with bar left an unused instance of
     variable foo around. Remove it.

     Fixes: abcdef012345678 ("x86/xxx: Replace foo with bar")
     Signed-off-by: J.Dev <j.dev@mail>

   The latter puts the information about the patch into the focus and
   amends it with the reference to the commit which introduced the issue
   rather than putting the focus on the original commit in the first place.

 - Reported-by: ``Reporter <reporter@mail>``

 - Closes: ``URL or Message-ID of the bug report this is fixing``

 - Originally-by: ``Original author <original-author@mail>``

 - Suggested-by: ``Suggester <suggester@mail>``

 - Co-developed-by: ``Co-author <co-author@mail>``

   Signed-off-by: ``Co-author <co-author@mail>``

   Note, that Co-developed-by and Signed-off-by of the co-author(s) must
   come in pairs.

 - Signed-off-by: ``Author <author@mail>``

   The first Signed-off-by (SOB) after the last Co-developed-by/SOB pair is the
   author SOB, i.e. the person flagged as author by git.

 - Signed-off-by: ``Patch handler <handler@mail>``

   SOBs after the author SOB are from people handling and transporting
   the patch, but were not involved in development. SOB chains should
   reflect the **real** route a patch took as it was propagated to us,
   with the first SOB entry signalling primary authorship of a single
   author. Acks should be given as Acked-by lines and review approvals
   as Reviewed-by lines.

   If the handler made modifications to the patch or the changelog, then
   this should be mentioned **after** the changelog text and **above**
   all commit tags in the following format::

     ... changelog text ends.

     [ handler: Replaced foo by bar and updated changelog ]

     First-tag: .....

   Note the two empty new lines which separate the changelog text and the
   commit tags from that notice.

   If a patch is sent to the mailing list by a handler then the author has
   to be noted in the first line of the changelog with::

     From: Author <author@mail>

     Changelog text starts here....

   so the authorship is preserved. The 'From:' line has to be followed
   by a empty newline. If that 'From:' line is missing, then the patch
   would be attributed to the person who sent (transported, handled) it.
   The 'From:' line is automatically removed when the patch is applied
   and does not show up in the final git changelog. It merely affects
   the authorship information of the resulting Git commit.

 - Tested-by: ``Tester <tester@mail>``

 - Reviewed-by: ``Reviewer <reviewer@mail>``

 - Acked-by: ``Acker <acker@mail>``

 - Cc: ``cc-ed-person <person@mail>``

   If the patch should be backported to stable, then please add a '``Cc:
   stable@vger.kernel.org``' tag, but do not Cc stable when sending your
   mail.

 - Link: ``https://link/to/information``

   For referring to an email posted to the kernel mailing lists, please
   use the lore.kernel.org redirector URL::

     Link: https://lore.kernel.org/email-message-id@here

   This URL should be used when referring to relevant mailing list
   topics, related patch sets, or other notable discussion threads.
   A convenient way to associate ``Link:`` trailers with the commit
   message is to use markdown-like bracketed notation, for example::

     A similar approach was attempted before as part of a different
     effort [1], but the initial implementation caused too many
     regressions [2], so it was backed out and reimplemented.

     Link: https://lore.kernel.org/some-msgid@here # [1]
     Link: https://bugzilla.example.org/bug/12345  # [2]

   You can also use ``Link:`` trailers to indicate the origin of the
   patch when applying it to your git tree. In that case, please use the
   dedicated ``patch.msgid.link`` domain instead of ``lore.kernel.org``.
   This practice makes it possible for automated tooling to identify
   which link to use to retrieve the original patch submission. For
   example::

     Link: https://patch.msgid.link/patch-source-message-id@here

Please do not use combined tags, e.g. ``Reported-and-tested-by``, as
they just complicate automated extraction of tags.


Links to documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Providing links to documentation in the changelog is a great help to later
debugging and analysis.  Unfortunately, URLs often break very quickly
because companies restructure their websites frequently.  Non-'volatile'
exceptions include the Intel SDM and the AMD APM.

Therefore, for 'volatile' documents, please create an entry in the kernel
bugzilla https://bugzilla.kernel.org and attach a copy of these documents
to the bugzilla entry. Finally, provide the URL of the bugzilla entry in
the changelog.

Patch resend or reminders
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

See :ref:`resend_reminders`.

Merge window
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Please do not expect patches to be reviewed or merged by tip
maintainers around or during the merge window.  The trees are closed
to all but urgent fixes during this time.  They reopen once the merge
window closes and a new -rc1 kernel has been released.

Large series should be submitted in mergeable state *at* *least* a week
before the merge window opens.  Exceptions are made for bug fixes and
*sometimes* for small standalone drivers for new hardware or minimally
invasive patches for hardware enablement.

During the merge window, the maintainers instead focus on following the
upstream changes, fixing merge window fallout, collecting bug fixes, and
allowing themselves a breath. Please respect that.

So called _urgent_ branches will be merged into mainline during the
stabilization phase of each release.


Git
^^^

The tip maintainers accept git pull requests from maintainers who provide
subsystem changes for aggregation in the tip tree.

Pull requests for new patch submissions are usually not accepted and do not
replace proper patch submission to the mailing list. The main reason for
this is that the review workflow is email based.

If you submit a larger patch series it is helpful to provide a git branch
in a private repository which allows interested people to easily pull the
series for testing. The usual way to offer this is a git URL in the cover
letter of the patch series.

Testing
^^^^^^^

Code should be tested before submitting to the tip maintainers.  Anything
other than minor changes should be built, booted and tested with
comprehensive (and heavyweight) kernel debugging options enabled.

These debugging options can be found in kernel/configs/x86_debug.config
and can be added to an existing kernel config by running:

	make x86_debug.config

Some of these options are x86-specific and can be left out when testing
on other architectures.

.. _maintainer-tip-coding-style:

Coding style notes
------------------

Comment style
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Sentences in comments start with an uppercase letter.

Single line comments::

	/* This is a single line comment */

Multi-line comments::

	/*
	 * This is a properly formatted
	 * multi-line comment.
	 *
	 * Larger multi-line comments should be split into paragraphs.
	 */

No tail comments (see below):

  Please refrain from using tail comments. Tail comments disturb the
  reading flow in almost all contexts, but especially in code::

	if (somecondition_is_true) /* Don't put a comment here */
		dostuff(); /* Neither here */

	seed = MAGIC_CONSTANT; /* Nor here */

  Use freestanding comments instead::

	/* This condition is not obvious without a comment */
	if (somecondition_is_true) {
		/* This really needs to be documented */
		dostuff();
	}

	/* This magic initialization needs a comment. Maybe not? */
	seed = MAGIC_CONSTANT;

  Use C++ style, tail comments when documenting structs in headers to
  achieve a more compact layout and better readability::

        // eax
        u32     x2apic_shift    :  5, // Number of bits to shift APIC ID right
                                      // for the topology ID at the next level
                                : 27; // Reserved
        // ebx
        u32     num_processors  : 16, // Number of processors at current level
                                : 16; // Reserved

  versus::

	/* eax */
	        /*
	         * Number of bits to shift APIC ID right for the topology ID
	         * at the next level
	         */
         u32     x2apic_shift    :  5,
		 /* Reserved */
				 : 27;

	/* ebx */
		/* Number of processors at current level */
	u32     num_processors  : 16,
		/* Reserved */
				: 16;

Comment the important things:

  Comments should be added where the operation is not obvious. Documenting
  the obvious is just a distraction::

	/* Decrement refcount and check for zero */
	if (refcount_dec_and_test(&p->refcnt)) {
		do;
		lots;
		of;
		magic;
		things;
	}

  Instead, comments should explain the non-obvious details and document
  constraints::

	if (refcount_dec_and_test(&p->refcnt)) {
		/*
		 * Really good explanation why the magic things below
		 * need to be done, ordering and locking constraints,
		 * etc..
		 */
		do;
		lots;
		of;
		magic;
		/* Needs to be the last operation because ... */
		things;
	}

Function documentation comments:

  To document functions and their arguments please use kernel-doc format
  and not free form comments::

	/**
	 * magic_function - Do lots of magic stuff
	 * @magic:	Pointer to the magic data to operate on
	 * @offset:	Offset in the data array of @magic
	 *
	 * Deep explanation of mysterious things done with @magic along
         * with documentation of the return values.
	 *
	 * Note, that the argument descriptors above are arranged
	 * in a tabular fashion.
	 */

  This applies especially to globally visible functions and inline
  functions in public header files. It might be overkill to use kernel-doc
  format for every (static) function which needs a tiny explanation. The
  usage of descriptive function names often replaces these tiny comments.
  Apply common sense as always.


Documenting locking requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  Documenting locking requirements is a good thing, but comments are not
  necessarily the best choice. Instead of writing::

	/* Caller must hold foo->lock */
	void func(struct foo *foo)
	{
		...
	}

  Please use::

	void func(struct foo *foo)
	{
		lockdep_assert_held(&foo->lock);
		...
	}

  In PROVE_LOCKING kernels, lockdep_assert_held() emits a warning
  if the caller doesn't hold the lock.  Comments can't do that.

Bracket rules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Brackets should be omitted only if the statement which follows 'if', 'for',
'while' etc. is truly a single line::

	if (foo)
		do_something();

The following is not considered to be a single line statement even
though C does not require brackets::

	for (i = 0; i < end; i++)
		if (foo[i])
			do_something(foo[i]);

Adding brackets around the outer loop enhances the reading flow::

	for (i = 0; i < end; i++) {
		if (foo[i])
			do_something(foo[i]);
	}


Variable declarations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The preferred ordering of variable declarations at the beginning of a
function is reverse fir tree order::

	struct long_struct_name *descriptive_name;
	unsigned long foo, bar;
	unsigned int tmp;
	int ret;

The above is faster to parse than the reverse ordering::

	int ret;
	unsigned int tmp;
	unsigned long foo, bar;
	struct long_struct_name *descriptive_name;

And even more so than random ordering::

	unsigned long foo, bar;
	int ret;
	struct long_struct_name *descriptive_name;
	unsigned int tmp;

Also please try to aggregate variables of the same type into a single
line. There is no point in wasting screen space::

	unsigned long a;
	unsigned long b;
	unsigned long c;
	unsigned long d;

It's really sufficient to do::

	unsigned long a, b, c, d;

Please also refrain from introducing line splits in variable declarations::

	struct long_struct_name *descriptive_name = container_of(bar,
						      struct long_struct_name,
	                                              member);
	struct foobar foo;

It's way better to move the initialization to a separate line after the
declarations::

	struct long_struct_name *descriptive_name;
	struct foobar foo;

	descriptive_name = container_of(bar, struct long_struct_name, member);


Variable types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Please use the proper u8, u16, u32, u64 types for variables which are meant
to describe hardware or are used as arguments for functions which access
hardware. These types are clearly defining the bit width and avoid
truncation, expansion and 32/64-bit confusion.

u64 is also recommended in code which would become ambiguous for 32-bit
kernels when 'unsigned long' would be used instead. While in such
situations 'unsigned long long' could be used as well, u64 is shorter
and also clearly shows that the operation is required to be 64 bits wide
independent of the target CPU.

Please use 'unsigned int' instead of 'unsigned'.


Constants
^^^^^^^^^

Please do not use literal (hexa)decimal numbers in code or initializers.
Either use proper defines which have descriptive names or consider using
an enum.


Struct declarations and initializers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Struct declarations should align the struct member names in a tabular
fashion::

	struct bar_order {
		unsigned int	guest_id;
		int		ordered_item;
		struct menu	*menu;
	};

Please avoid documenting struct members within the declaration, because
this often results in strangely formatted comments and the struct members
become obfuscated::

	struct bar_order {
		unsigned int	guest_id; /* Unique guest id */
		int		ordered_item;
		/* Pointer to a menu instance which contains all the drinks */
		struct menu	*menu;
	};

Instead, please consider using the kernel-doc format in a comment preceding
the struct declaration, which is easier to read and has the added advantage
of including the information in the kernel documentation, for example, as
follows::


	/**
	 * struct bar_order - Description of a bar order
	 * @guest_id:		Unique guest id
	 * @ordered_item:	The item number from the menu
	 * @menu:		Pointer to the menu from which the item
	 *  			was ordered
	 *
	 * Supplementary information for using the struct.
	 *
	 * Note, that the struct member descriptors above are arranged
	 * in a tabular fashion.
	 */
	struct bar_order {
		unsigned int	guest_id;
		int		ordered_item;
		struct menu	*menu;
	};

Static struct initializers must use C99 initializers and should also be
aligned in a tabular fashion::

	static struct foo statfoo = {
		.a		= 0,
		.plain_integer	= CONSTANT_DEFINE_OR_ENUM,
		.bar		= &statbar,
	};

Note that while C99 syntax allows the omission of the final comma,
we recommend the use of a comma on the last line because it makes
reordering and addition of new lines easier, and makes such future
patches slightly easier to read as well.

Line breaks
^^^^^^^^^^^

Restricting line length to 80 characters makes deeply indented code hard to
read.  Consider breaking out code into helper functions to avoid excessive
line breaking.

The 80 character rule is not a strict rule, so please use common sense when
breaking lines. Especially format strings should never be broken up.

When splitting function declarations or function calls, then please align
the first argument in the second line with the first argument in the first
line::

  static int long_function_name(struct foobar *barfoo, unsigned int id,
				unsigned int offset)
  {

	if (!id) {
		ret = longer_function_name(barfoo, DEFAULT_BARFOO_ID,
					   offset);
	...

Namespaces
^^^^^^^^^^

Function/variable namespaces improve readability and allow easy
grepping. These namespaces are string prefixes for globally visible
function and variable names, including inlines. These prefixes should
combine the subsystem and the component name such as 'x86_comp\_',
'sched\_', 'irq\_', and 'mutex\_'.

This also includes static file scope functions that are immediately put
into globally visible driver templates - it's useful for those symbols
to carry a good prefix as well, for backtrace readability.

Namespace prefixes may be omitted for local static functions and
variables. Truly local functions, only called by other local functions,
can have shorter descriptive names - our primary concern is greppability
and backtrace readability.

Please note that 'xxx_vendor\_' and 'vendor_xxx_` prefixes are not
helpful for static functions in vendor-specific files. After all, it
is already clear that the code is vendor-specific. In addition, vendor
names should only be for truly vendor-specific functionality.

As always apply common sense and aim for consistency and readability.


Commit notifications
--------------------

The tip tree is monitored by a bot for new commits. The bot sends an email
for each new commit to a dedicated mailing list
(``linux-tip-commits@vger.kernel.org``) and Cc's all people who are
mentioned in one of the commit tags. It uses the email message ID from the
Link tag at the end of the tag list to set the In-Reply-To email header so
the message is properly threaded with the patch submission email.

The tip maintainers and submaintainers try to reply to the submitter
when merging a patch, but they sometimes forget or it does not fit the
workflow of the moment. While the bot message is purely mechanical, it
also implies a 'Thank you! Applied.'.
.. maintainers-include::
.. _managementstyle:

Linux kernel management style
=============================

This is a short document describing the preferred (or made up, depending
on who you ask) management style for the linux kernel.  It's meant to
mirror the :ref:`process/coding-style.rst <codingstyle>` document to some
degree, and mainly written to avoid answering [#f1]_  the same (or similar)
questions over and over again.

Management style is very personal and much harder to quantify than
simple coding style rules, so this document may or may not have anything
to do with reality.  It started as a lark, but that doesn't mean that it
might not actually be true. You'll have to decide for yourself.

Btw, when talking about "kernel manager", it's all about the technical
lead persons, not the people who do traditional management inside
companies.  If you sign purchase orders or you have any clue about the
budget of your group, you're almost certainly not a kernel manager.
These suggestions may or may not apply to you.

First off, I'd suggest buying "Seven Habits of Highly Effective
People", and NOT read it.  Burn it, it's a great symbolic gesture.

.. [#f1] This document does so not so much by answering the question, but by
  making it painfully obvious to the questioner that we don't have a clue
  to what the answer is.

Anyway, here goes:

.. _decisions:

1) Decisions
------------

Everybody thinks managers make decisions, and that decision-making is
important.  The bigger and more painful the decision, the bigger the
manager must be to make it.  That's very deep and obvious, but it's not
actually true.

The name of the game is to **avoid** having to make a decision.  In
particular, if somebody tells you "choose (a) or (b), we really need you
to decide on this", you're in trouble as a manager.  The people you
manage had better know the details better than you, so if they come to
you for a technical decision, you're screwed.  You're clearly not
competent to make that decision for them.

(Corollary:if the people you manage don't know the details better than
you, you're also screwed, although for a totally different reason.
Namely that you are in the wrong job, and that **they** should be managing
your brilliance instead).

So the name of the game is to **avoid** decisions, at least the big and
painful ones.  Making small and non-consequential decisions is fine, and
makes you look like you know what you're doing, so what a kernel manager
needs to do is to turn the big and painful ones into small things where
nobody really cares.

It helps to realize that the key difference between a big decision and a
small one is whether you can fix your decision afterwards.  Any decision
can be made small by just always making sure that if you were wrong (and
you **will** be wrong), you can always undo the damage later by
backtracking.  Suddenly, you get to be doubly managerial for making
**two** inconsequential decisions - the wrong one **and** the right one.

And people will even see that as true leadership (*cough* bullshit
*cough*).

Thus the key to avoiding big decisions becomes to just avoiding to do
things that can't be undone.  Don't get ushered into a corner from which
you cannot escape.  A cornered rat may be dangerous - a cornered manager
is just pitiful.

It turns out that since nobody would be stupid enough to ever really let
a kernel manager have huge fiscal responsibility **anyway**, it's usually
fairly easy to backtrack.  Since you're not going to be able to waste
huge amounts of money that you might not be able to repay, the only
thing you can backtrack on is a technical decision, and there
back-tracking is very easy: just tell everybody that you were an
incompetent nincompoop, say you're sorry, and undo all the worthless
work you had people work on for the last year.  Suddenly the decision
you made a year ago wasn't a big decision after all, since it could be
easily undone.

It turns out that some people have trouble with this approach, for two
reasons:

 - admitting you were an idiot is harder than it looks.  We all like to
   maintain appearances, and coming out in public to say that you were
   wrong is sometimes very hard indeed.
 - having somebody tell you that what you worked on for the last year
   wasn't worthwhile after all can be hard on the poor lowly engineers
   too, and while the actual **work** was easy enough to undo by just
   deleting it, you may have irrevocably lost the trust of that
   engineer.  And remember: "irrevocable" was what we tried to avoid in
   the first place, and your decision ended up being a big one after
   all.

Happily, both of these reasons can be mitigated effectively by just
admitting up-front that you don't have a friggin' clue, and telling
people ahead of the fact that your decision is purely preliminary, and
might be the wrong thing.  You should always reserve the right to change
your mind, and make people very **aware** of that.  And it's much easier
to admit that you are stupid when you haven't **yet** done the really
stupid thing.

Then, when it really does turn out to be stupid, people just roll their
eyes and say "Oops, not again".

This preemptive admission of incompetence might also make the people who
actually do the work also think twice about whether it's worth doing or
not.  After all, if **they** aren't certain whether it's a good idea, you
sure as hell shouldn't encourage them by promising them that what they
work on will be included.  Make them at least think twice before they
embark on a big endeavor.

Remember: they'd better know more about the details than you do, and
they usually already think they have the answer to everything.  The best
thing you can do as a manager is not to instill confidence, but rather a
healthy dose of critical thinking on what they do.

Btw, another way to avoid a decision is to plaintively just whine "can't
we just do both?" and look pitiful.  Trust me, it works.  If it's not
clear which approach is better, they'll eventually figure it out.  The
answer may end up being that both teams get so frustrated by the
situation that they just give up.

That may sound like a failure, but it's usually a sign that there was
something wrong with both projects, and the reason the people involved
couldn't decide was that they were both wrong.  You end up coming up
smelling like roses, and you avoided yet another decision that you could
have screwed up on.


2) People
---------

Most people are idiots, and being a manager means you'll have to deal
with it, and perhaps more importantly, that **they** have to deal with
**you**.

It turns out that while it's easy to undo technical mistakes, it's not
as easy to undo personality disorders.  You just have to live with
theirs - and yours.

However, in order to prepare yourself as a kernel manager, it's best to
remember not to burn any bridges, bomb any innocent villagers, or
alienate too many kernel developers. It turns out that alienating people
is fairly easy, and un-alienating them is hard. Thus "alienating"
immediately falls under the heading of "not reversible", and becomes a
no-no according to :ref:`decisions`.

There's just a few simple rules here:

 (1) don't call people d*ckheads (at least not in public)
 (2) learn how to apologize when you forgot rule (1)

The problem with #1 is that it's very easy to do, since you can say
"you're a d*ckhead" in millions of different ways [#f2]_, sometimes without
even realizing it, and almost always with a white-hot conviction that
you are right.

And the more convinced you are that you are right (and let's face it,
you can call just about **anybody** a d*ckhead, and you often **will** be
right), the harder it ends up being to apologize afterwards.

To solve this problem, you really only have two options:

 - get really good at apologies
 - spread the "love" out so evenly that nobody really ends up feeling
   like they get unfairly targeted.  Make it inventive enough, and they
   might even be amused.

The option of being unfailingly polite really doesn't exist. Nobody will
trust somebody who is so clearly hiding their true character.

.. [#f2] Paul Simon sang "Fifty Ways to Leave Your Lover", because quite
  frankly, "A Million Ways to Tell a Developer They're a D*ckhead" doesn't
  scan nearly as well.  But I'm sure he thought about it.


3) People II - the Good Kind
----------------------------

While it turns out that most people are idiots, the corollary to that is
sadly that you are one too, and that while we can all bask in the secure
knowledge that we're better than the average person (let's face it,
nobody ever believes that they're average or below-average), we should
also admit that we're not the sharpest knife around, and there will be
other people that are less of an idiot than you are.

Some people react badly to smart people.  Others take advantage of them.

Make sure that you, as a kernel maintainer, are in the second group.
Suck up to them, because they are the people who will make your job
easier. In particular, they'll be able to make your decisions for you,
which is what the game is all about.

So when you find somebody smarter than you are, just coast along.  Your
management responsibilities largely become ones of saying "Sounds like a
good idea - go wild", or "That sounds good, but what about xxx?".  The
second version in particular is a great way to either learn something
new about "xxx" or seem **extra** managerial by pointing out something the
smarter person hadn't thought about.  In either case, you win.

One thing to look out for is to realize that greatness in one area does
not necessarily translate to other areas.  So you might prod people in
specific directions, but let's face it, they might be good at what they
do, and suck at everything else.  The good news is that people tend to
naturally gravitate back to what they are good at, so it's not like you
are doing something irreversible when you **do** prod them in some
direction, just don't push too hard.


4) Placing blame
----------------

Things will go wrong, and people want somebody to blame. Tag, you're it.

It's not actually that hard to accept the blame, especially if people
kind of realize that it wasn't **all** your fault.  Which brings us to the
best way of taking the blame: do it for someone else. You'll feel good
for taking the fall, they'll feel good about not getting blamed, and the
person who lost their whole 36GB porn-collection because of your
incompetence will grudgingly admit that you at least didn't try to weasel
out of it.

Then make the developer who really screwed up (if you can find them) know
**in private** that they screwed up.  Not just so they can avoid it in the
future, but so that they know they owe you one.  And, perhaps even more
importantly, they're also likely the person who can fix it.  Because, let's
face it, it sure ain't you.

Taking the blame is also why you get to be manager in the first place.
It's part of what makes people trust you, and allow you the potential
glory, because you're the one who gets to say "I screwed up".  And if
you've followed the previous rules, you'll be pretty good at saying that
by now.


5) Things to avoid
------------------

There's one thing people hate even more than being called "d*ckhead",
and that is being called a "d*ckhead" in a sanctimonious voice.  The
first you can apologize for, the second one you won't really get the
chance.  They likely will no longer be listening even if you otherwise
do a good job.

We all think we're better than anybody else, which means that when
somebody else puts on airs, it **really** rubs us the wrong way.  You may
be morally and intellectually superior to everybody around you, but
don't try to make it too obvious unless you really **intend** to irritate
somebody [#f3]_.

Similarly, don't be too polite or subtle about things. Politeness easily
ends up going overboard and hiding the problem, and as they say, "On the
internet, nobody can hear you being subtle". Use a big blunt object to
hammer the point in, because you can't really depend on people getting
your point otherwise.

Some humor can help pad both the bluntness and the moralizing.  Going
overboard to the point of being ridiculous can drive a point home
without making it painful to the recipient, who just thinks you're being
silly.  It can thus help get through the personal mental block we all
have about criticism.

.. [#f3] Hint: internet newsgroups that are not directly related to your work
  are great ways to take out your frustrations at other people. Write
  insulting posts with a sneer just to get into a good flame every once in
  a while, and you'll feel cleansed. Just don't crap too close to home.


6) Why me?
----------

Since your main responsibility seems to be to take the blame for other
peoples mistakes, and make it painfully obvious to everybody else that
you're incompetent, the obvious question becomes one of why do it in the
first place?

First off, while you may or may not get screaming teenage girls (or
boys, let's not be judgmental or sexist here) knocking on your dressing
room door, you **will** get an immense feeling of personal accomplishment
for being "in charge".  Never mind the fact that you're really leading
by trying to keep up with everybody else and running after them as fast
as you can.  Everybody will still think you're the person in charge.

It's a great job if you can hack it.
.. _programming_language:

Programming Language
====================

The kernel is written in the C programming language [c-language]_.
More precisely, the kernel is typically compiled with ``gcc`` [gcc]_
under ``-std=gnu11`` [gcc-c-dialect-options]_: the GNU dialect of ISO C11.
``clang`` [clang]_ is also supported, see docs on
:ref:`Building Linux with Clang/LLVM <kbuild_llvm>`.

This dialect contains many extensions to the language [gnu-extensions]_,
and many of them are used within the kernel as a matter of course.

Attributes
----------

One of the common extensions used throughout the kernel are attributes
[gcc-attribute-syntax]_. Attributes allow to introduce
implementation-defined semantics to language entities (like variables,
functions or types) without having to make significant syntactic changes
to the language (e.g. adding a new keyword) [n2049]_.

In some cases, attributes are optional (i.e. a compiler not supporting them
should still produce proper code, even if it is slower or does not perform
as many compile-time checks/diagnostics).

The kernel defines pseudo-keywords (e.g. ``__pure``) instead of using
directly the GNU attribute syntax (e.g. ``__attribute__((__pure__))``)
in order to feature detect which ones can be used and/or to shorten the code.

Please refer to ``include/linux/compiler_attributes.h`` for more information.

Rust
----

The kernel has experimental support for the Rust programming language
[rust-language]_ under ``CONFIG_RUST``. It is compiled with ``rustc`` [rustc]_
under ``--edition=2021`` [rust-editions]_. Editions are a way to introduce
small changes to the language that are not backwards compatible.

On top of that, some unstable features [rust-unstable-features]_ are used in
the kernel. Unstable features may change in the future, thus it is an important
goal to reach a point where only stable features are used.

Please refer to Documentation/rust/index.rst for more information.

.. [c-language] http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/standards
.. [gcc] https://gcc.gnu.org
.. [clang] https://clang.llvm.org
.. [gcc-c-dialect-options] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/C-Dialect-Options.html
.. [gnu-extensions] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/C-Extensions.html
.. [gcc-attribute-syntax] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Attribute-Syntax.html
.. [n2049] http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n2049.pdf
.. [rust-language] https://www.rust-lang.org
.. [rustc] https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/
.. [rust-editions] https://doc.rust-lang.org/edition-guide/editions/
.. [rust-unstable-features] https://github.com/Rust-for-Linux/linux/issues/2
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

.. _researcher_guidelines:

Researcher Guidelines
+++++++++++++++++++++

The Linux kernel community welcomes transparent research on the Linux
kernel, the activities involved in producing it, and any other byproducts
of its development. Linux benefits greatly from this kind of research, and
most aspects of Linux are driven by research in one form or another.

The community greatly appreciates if researchers can share preliminary
findings before making their results public, especially if such research
involves security. Getting involved early helps both improve the quality
of research and ability for Linux to improve from it. In any case,
sharing open access copies of the published research with the community
is recommended.

This document seeks to clarify what the Linux kernel community considers
acceptable and non-acceptable practices when conducting such research. At
the very least, such research and related activities should follow
standard research ethics rules. For more background on research ethics
generally, ethics in technology, and research of developer communities
in particular, see:

* `History of Research Ethics <https://www.unlv.edu/research/ORI-HSR/history-ethics>`_
* `IEEE Ethics <https://www.ieee.org/about/ethics/index.html>`_
* `Developer and Researcher Views on the Ethics of Experiments on Open-Source Projects <https://arxiv.org/pdf/2112.13217.pdf>`_

The Linux kernel community expects that everyone interacting with the
project is participating in good faith to make Linux better. Research on
any publicly-available artifact (including, but not limited to source
code) produced by the Linux kernel community is welcome, though research
on developers must be distinctly opt-in.

Passive research that is based entirely on publicly available sources,
including posts to public mailing lists and commits to public
repositories, is clearly permissible. Though, as with any research,
standard ethics must still be followed.

Active research on developer behavior, however, must be done with the
explicit agreement of, and full disclosure to, the individual developers
involved. Developers cannot be interacted with/experimented on without
consent; this, too, is standard research ethics.

Surveys
=======

Research often takes the form of surveys sent to maintainers or
contributors.  As a general rule, though, the kernel community derives
little value from these surveys.  The kernel development process works
because every developer benefits from their participation, even working
with others who have different goals.  Responding to a survey, though, is a
one-way demand placed on busy developers with no corresponding benefit to
themselves or to the kernel community as a whole.  For this reason, this
method of research is discouraged.

Kernel community members already receive far too much email and are likely
to perceive survey requests as just another demand on their time.  Sending
such requests deprives the community of valuable contributor time and is
unlikely to yield a statistically useful response.

As an alternative, researchers should consider attending developer events,
hosting sessions where the research project and its benefits to the
participants can be explained, and interacting directly with the community
there.  The information received will be far richer than that obtained from
an email survey, and the community will gain from the ability to learn from
your insights as well.

Patches
=======

To help clarify: sending patches to developers *is* interacting
with them, but they have already consented to receiving *good faith
contributions*. Sending intentionally flawed/vulnerable patches or
contributing misleading information to discussions is not consented
to. Such communication can be damaging to the developer (e.g. draining
time, effort, and morale) and damaging to the project by eroding
the entire developer community's trust in the contributor (and the
contributor's organization as a whole), undermining efforts to provide
constructive feedback to contributors, and putting end users at risk of
software flaws.

Participation in the development of Linux itself by researchers, as
with anyone, is welcomed and encouraged. Research into Linux code is
a common practice, especially when it comes to developing or running
analysis tools that produce actionable results.

When engaging with the developer community, sending a patch has
traditionally been the best way to make an impact. Linux already has
plenty of known bugs -- what's much more helpful is having vetted fixes.
Before contributing, carefully read the appropriate documentation:

* Documentation/process/development-process.rst
* Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst
* Documentation/admin-guide/reporting-issues.rst
* Documentation/process/security-bugs.rst

Then send a patch (including a commit log with all the details listed
below) and follow up on any feedback from other developers.

When sending patches produced from research, the commit logs should
contain at least the following details, so that developers have
appropriate context for understanding the contribution. Answer:

* What is the specific problem that has been found?
* How could the problem be reached on a running system?
* What effect would encountering the problem have on the system?
* How was the problem found? Specifically include details about any
  testing, static or dynamic analysis programs, and any other tools or
  methods used to perform the work.
* Which version of Linux was the problem found on? Using the most recent
  release or a recent linux-next branch is strongly preferred (see
  Documentation/process/howto.rst).
* What was changed to fix the problem, and why it is believed to be correct?
* How was the change build tested and run-time tested?
* What prior commit does this change fix? This should go in a "Fixes:"
  tag as the documentation describes.
* Who else has reviewed this patch? This should go in appropriate
  "Reviewed-by:" tags; see below.

For example::

  From: Author <author@email>
  Subject: [PATCH] drivers/foo_bar: Add missing kfree()

  The error path in foo_bar driver does not correctly free the allocated
  struct foo_bar_info. This can happen if the attached foo_bar device
  rejects the initialization packets sent during foo_bar_probe(). This
  would result in a 64 byte slab memory leak once per device attach,
  wasting memory resources over time.

  This flaw was found using an experimental static analysis tool we are
  developing, LeakMagic[1], which reported the following warning when
  analyzing the v5.15 kernel release:

   path/to/foo_bar.c:187: missing kfree() call?

  Add the missing kfree() to the error path. No other references to
  this memory exist outside the probe function, so this is the only
  place it can be freed.

  x86_64 and arm64 defconfig builds with CONFIG_FOO_BAR=y using GCC
  11.2 show no new warnings, and LeakMagic no longer warns about this
  code path. As we don't have a FooBar device to test with, no runtime
  testing was able to be performed.

  [1] https://url/to/leakmagic/details

  Reported-by: Researcher <researcher@email>
  Fixes: aaaabbbbccccdddd ("Introduce support for FooBar")
  Signed-off-by: Author <author@email>
  Reviewed-by: Reviewer <reviewer@email>

If you are a first time contributor it is recommended that the patch
itself be vetted by others privately before being posted to public lists.
(This is required if you have been explicitly told your patches need
more careful internal review.) These people are expected to have their
"Reviewed-by" tag included in the resulting patch. Finding another
developer familiar with Linux contribution, especially within your own
organization, and having them help with reviews before sending them to
the public mailing lists tends to significantly improve the quality of the
resulting patches, and there by reduces the burden on other developers.

If no one can be found to internally review patches and you need
help finding such a person, or if you have any other questions
related to this document and the developer community's expectations,
please reach out to the private Technical Advisory Board mailing list:
<tech-board@groups.linuxfoundation.org>.
.. _securitybugs:

Security bugs
=============

Linux kernel developers take security very seriously.  As such, we'd
like to know when a security bug is found so that it can be fixed and
disclosed as quickly as possible.  Please report security bugs to the
Linux kernel security team.

Contact
-------

The Linux kernel security team can be contacted by email at
<security@kernel.org>.  This is a private list of security officers
who will help verify the bug report and develop and release a fix.
If you already have a fix, please include it with your report, as
that can speed up the process considerably.  It is possible that the
security team will bring in extra help from area maintainers to
understand and fix the security vulnerability.

As it is with any bug, the more information provided the easier it
will be to diagnose and fix.  Please review the procedure outlined in
'Documentation/admin-guide/reporting-issues.rst' if you are unclear about what
information is helpful.  Any exploit code is very helpful and will not
be released without consent from the reporter unless it has already been
made public.

Please send plain text emails without attachments where possible.
It is much harder to have a context-quoted discussion about a complex
issue if all the details are hidden away in attachments.  Think of it like a
:doc:`regular patch submission <../process/submitting-patches>`
(even if you don't have a patch yet): describe the problem and impact, list
reproduction steps, and follow it with a proposed fix, all in plain text.

Disclosure and embargoed information
------------------------------------

The security list is not a disclosure channel.  For that, see Coordination
below.

Once a robust fix has been developed, the release process starts.  Fixes
for publicly known bugs are released immediately.

Although our preference is to release fixes for publicly undisclosed bugs
as soon as they become available, this may be postponed at the request of
the reporter or an affected party for up to 7 calendar days from the start
of the release process, with an exceptional extension to 14 calendar days
if it is agreed that the criticality of the bug requires more time.  The
only valid reason for deferring the publication of a fix is to accommodate
the logistics of QA and large scale rollouts which require release
coordination.

While embargoed information may be shared with trusted individuals in
order to develop a fix, such information will not be published alongside
the fix or on any other disclosure channel without the permission of the
reporter.  This includes but is not limited to the original bug report
and followup discussions (if any), exploits, CVE information or the
identity of the reporter.

In other words our only interest is in getting bugs fixed.  All other
information submitted to the security list and any followup discussions
of the report are treated confidentially even after the embargo has been
lifted, in perpetuity.

Coordination with other groups
------------------------------

While the kernel security team solely focuses on getting bugs fixed,
other groups focus on fixing issues in distros and coordinating
disclosure between operating system vendors.  Coordination is usually
handled by the "linux-distros" mailing list and disclosure by the
public "oss-security" mailing list, both of which are closely related
and presented in the linux-distros wiki:
<https://oss-security.openwall.org/wiki/mailing-lists/distros>

Please note that the respective policies and rules are different since
the 3 lists pursue different goals.  Coordinating between the kernel
security team and other teams is difficult since for the kernel security
team occasional embargoes (as subject to a maximum allowed number of
days) start from the availability of a fix, while for "linux-distros"
they start from the initial post to the list regardless of the
availability of a fix.

As such, the kernel security team strongly recommends that as a reporter
of a potential security issue you DO NOT contact the "linux-distros"
mailing list UNTIL a fix is accepted by the affected code's maintainers
and you have read the distros wiki page above and you fully understand
the requirements that contacting "linux-distros" will impose on you and
the kernel community.  This also means that in general it doesn't make
sense to Cc: both lists at once, except maybe for coordination if and
while an accepted fix has not yet been merged.  In other words, until a
fix is accepted do not Cc: "linux-distros", and after it's merged do not
Cc: the kernel security team.

CVE assignment
--------------

The security team does not assign CVEs, nor do we require them for
reports or fixes, as this can needlessly complicate the process and may
delay the bug handling.  If a reporter wishes to have a CVE identifier
assigned for a confirmed issue, they can contact the :doc:`kernel CVE
assignment team<../process/cve>` to obtain one.

Non-disclosure agreements
-------------------------

The Linux kernel security team is not a formal body and therefore unable
to enter any non-disclosure agreements.
.. _stable_api_nonsense:

The Linux Kernel Driver Interface
==================================

(all of your questions answered and then some)

Greg Kroah-Hartman <greg@kroah.com>

This is being written to try to explain why Linux **does not have a binary
kernel interface, nor does it have a stable kernel interface**.

.. note::

  Please realize that this article describes the **in kernel** interfaces, not
  the kernel to userspace interfaces.

  The kernel to userspace interface is the one that application programs use,
  the syscall interface.  That interface is **very** stable over time, and
  will not break.  I have old programs that were built on a pre 0.9something
  kernel that still work just fine on the latest 2.6 kernel release.
  That interface is the one that users and application programmers can count
  on being stable.


Executive Summary
-----------------
You think you want a stable kernel interface, but you really do not, and
you don't even know it.  What you want is a stable running driver, and
you get that only if your driver is in the main kernel tree.  You also
get lots of other good benefits if your driver is in the main kernel
tree, all of which has made Linux into such a strong, stable, and mature
operating system which is the reason you are using it in the first
place.


Intro
-----

It's only the odd person who wants to write a kernel driver that needs
to worry about the in-kernel interfaces changing.  For the majority of
the world, they neither see this interface, nor do they care about it at
all.

First off, I'm not going to address **any** legal issues about closed
source, hidden source, binary blobs, source wrappers, or any other term
that describes kernel drivers that do not have their source code
released under the GPL.  Please consult a lawyer if you have any legal
questions, I'm a programmer and hence, I'm just going to be describing
the technical issues here (not to make light of the legal issues, they
are real, and you do need to be aware of them at all times.)

So, there are two main topics here, binary kernel interfaces and stable
kernel source interfaces.  They both depend on each other, but we will
discuss the binary stuff first to get it out of the way.


Binary Kernel Interface
-----------------------
Assuming that we had a stable kernel source interface for the kernel, a
binary interface would naturally happen too, right?  Wrong.  Please
consider the following facts about the Linux kernel:

  - Depending on the version of the C compiler you use, different kernel
    data structures will contain different alignment of structures, and
    possibly include different functions in different ways (putting
    functions inline or not.)  The individual function organization
    isn't that important, but the different data structure padding is
    very important.

  - Depending on what kernel build options you select, a wide range of
    different things can be assumed by the kernel:

      - different structures can contain different fields
      - Some functions may not be implemented at all, (i.e. some locks
	compile away to nothing for non-SMP builds.)
      - Memory within the kernel can be aligned in different ways,
	depending on the build options.

  - Linux runs on a wide range of different processor architectures.
    There is no way that binary drivers from one architecture will run
    on another architecture properly.

Now a number of these issues can be addressed by simply compiling your
module for the exact specific kernel configuration, using the same exact
C compiler that the kernel was built with.  This is sufficient if you
want to provide a module for a specific release version of a specific
Linux distribution.  But multiply that single build by the number of
different Linux distributions and the number of different supported
releases of the Linux distribution and you quickly have a nightmare of
different build options on different releases.  Also realize that each
Linux distribution release contains a number of different kernels, all
tuned to different hardware types (different processor types and
different options), so for even a single release you will need to create
multiple versions of your module.

Trust me, you will go insane over time if you try to support this kind
of release, I learned this the hard way a long time ago...


Stable Kernel Source Interfaces
-------------------------------

This is a much more "volatile" topic if you talk to people who try to
keep a Linux kernel driver that is not in the main kernel tree up to
date over time.

Linux kernel development is continuous and at a rapid pace, never
stopping to slow down.  As such, the kernel developers find bugs in
current interfaces, or figure out a better way to do things.  If they do
that, they then fix the current interfaces to work better.  When they do
so, function names may change, structures may grow or shrink, and
function parameters may be reworked.  If this happens, all of the
instances of where this interface is used within the kernel are fixed up
at the same time, ensuring that everything continues to work properly.

As a specific examples of this, the in-kernel USB interfaces have
undergone at least three different reworks over the lifetime of this
subsystem.  These reworks were done to address a number of different
issues:

  - A change from a synchronous model of data streams to an asynchronous
    one.  This reduced the complexity of a number of drivers and
    increased the throughput of all USB drivers such that we are now
    running almost all USB devices at their maximum speed possible.
  - A change was made in the way data packets were allocated from the
    USB core by USB drivers so that all drivers now needed to provide
    more information to the USB core to fix a number of documented
    deadlocks.

This is in stark contrast to a number of closed source operating systems
which have had to maintain their older USB interfaces over time.  This
provides the ability for new developers to accidentally use the old
interfaces and do things in improper ways, causing the stability of the
operating system to suffer.

In both of these instances, all developers agreed that these were
important changes that needed to be made, and they were made, with
relatively little pain.  If Linux had to ensure that it will preserve a
stable source interface, a new interface would have been created, and
the older, broken one would have had to be maintained over time, leading
to extra work for the USB developers.  Since all Linux USB developers do
their work on their own time, asking programmers to do extra work for no
gain, for free, is not a possibility.

Security issues are also very important for Linux.  When a
security issue is found, it is fixed in a very short amount of time.  A
number of times this has caused internal kernel interfaces to be
reworked to prevent the security problem from occurring.  When this
happens, all drivers that use the interfaces were also fixed at the
same time, ensuring that the security problem was fixed and could not
come back at some future time accidentally.  If the internal interfaces
were not allowed to change, fixing this kind of security problem and
insuring that it could not happen again would not be possible.

Kernel interfaces are cleaned up over time.  If there is no one using a
current interface, it is deleted.  This ensures that the kernel remains
as small as possible, and that all potential interfaces are tested as
well as they can be (unused interfaces are pretty much impossible to
test for validity.)


What to do
----------

So, if you have a Linux kernel driver that is not in the main kernel
tree, what are you, a developer, supposed to do?  Releasing a binary
driver for every different kernel version for every distribution is a
nightmare, and trying to keep up with an ever changing kernel interface
is also a rough job.

Simple, get your kernel driver into the main kernel tree (remember we are
talking about drivers released under a GPL-compatible license here, if your
code doesn't fall under this category, good luck, you are on your own here,
you leech).  If your driver is in the tree, and a kernel interface changes,
it will be fixed up by the person who did the kernel change in the first
place.  This ensures that your driver is always buildable, and works over
time, with very little effort on your part.

The very good side effects of having your driver in the main kernel tree
are:

  - The quality of the driver will rise as the maintenance costs (to the
    original developer) will decrease.
  - Other developers will add features to your driver.
  - Other people will find and fix bugs in your driver.
  - Other people will find tuning opportunities in your driver.
  - Other people will update the driver for you when external interface
    changes require it.
  - The driver automatically gets shipped in all Linux distributions
    without having to ask the distros to add it.

As Linux supports a larger number of different devices "out of the box"
than any other operating system, and it supports these devices on more
different processor architectures than any other operating system, this
proven type of development model must be doing something right :)



------

Thanks to Randy Dunlap, Andrew Morton, David Brownell, Hanna Linder,
Robert Love, and Nishanth Aravamudan for their review and comments on
early drafts of this paper.
.. _stable_kernel_rules:

Everything you ever wanted to know about Linux -stable releases
===============================================================

Rules on what kind of patches are accepted, and which ones are not, into the
"-stable" tree:

- It or an equivalent fix must already exist in Linux mainline (upstream).
- It must be obviously correct and tested.
- It cannot be bigger than 100 lines, with context.
- It must follow the
  :ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`
  rules.
- It must either fix a real bug that bothers people or just add a device ID.
  To elaborate on the former:

  - It fixes a problem like an oops, a hang, data corruption, a real security
    issue, a hardware quirk, a build error (but not for things marked
    CONFIG_BROKEN), or some "oh, that's not good" issue.
  - Serious issues as reported by a user of a distribution kernel may also
    be considered if they fix a notable performance or interactivity issue.
    As these fixes are not as obvious and have a higher risk of a subtle
    regression they should only be submitted by a distribution kernel
    maintainer and include an addendum linking to a bugzilla entry if it
    exists and additional information on the user-visible impact.
  - No "This could be a problem..." type of things like a "theoretical race
    condition", unless an explanation of how the bug can be exploited is also
    provided.
  - No "trivial" fixes without benefit for users (spelling changes, whitespace
    cleanups, etc).


Procedure for submitting patches to the -stable tree
----------------------------------------------------

.. note::

   Security patches should not be handled (solely) by the -stable review
   process but should follow the procedures in
   :ref:`Documentation/process/security-bugs.rst <securitybugs>`.

There are three options to submit a change to -stable trees:

1. Add a 'stable tag' to the description of a patch you then submit for
   mainline inclusion.
2. Ask the stable team to pick up a patch already mainlined.
3. Submit a patch to the stable team that is equivalent to a change already
   mainlined.

The sections below describe each of the options in more detail.

:ref:`option_1` is **strongly** preferred, it is the easiest and most common.
:ref:`option_2` is mainly meant for changes where backporting was not considered
at the time of submission. :ref:`option_3` is an alternative to the two earlier
options for cases where a mainlined patch needs adjustments to apply in older
series (for example due to API changes).

When using option 2 or 3 you can ask for your change to be included in specific
stable series. When doing so, ensure the fix or an equivalent is applicable,
submitted, or already present in all newer stable trees still supported. This is
meant to prevent regressions that users might later encounter on updating, if
e.g. a fix merged for 5.19-rc1 would be backported to 5.10.y, but not to 5.15.y.

.. _option_1:

Option 1
********

To have a patch you submit for mainline inclusion later automatically picked up
for stable trees, add this tag in the sign-off area::

  Cc: stable@vger.kernel.org

Use ``Cc: stable@kernel.org`` instead when fixing unpublished vulnerabilities:
it reduces the chance of accidentally exposing the fix to the public by way of
'git send-email', as mails sent to that address are not delivered anywhere.

Once the patch is mainlined it will be applied to the stable tree without
anything else needing to be done by the author or subsystem maintainer.

To send additional instructions to the stable team, use a shell-style inline
comment to pass arbitrary or predefined notes:

* Specify any additional patch prerequisites for cherry picking::

    Cc: <stable@vger.kernel.org> # 3.3.x: a1f84a3: sched: Check for idle
    Cc: <stable@vger.kernel.org> # 3.3.x: 1b9508f: sched: Rate-limit newidle
    Cc: <stable@vger.kernel.org> # 3.3.x: fd21073: sched: Fix affinity logic
    Cc: <stable@vger.kernel.org> # 3.3.x
    Signed-off-by: Ingo Molnar <mingo@elte.hu>

  The tag sequence has the meaning of::

    git cherry-pick a1f84a3
    git cherry-pick 1b9508f
    git cherry-pick fd21073
    git cherry-pick <this commit>

  Note that for a patch series, you do not have to list as prerequisites the
  patches present in the series itself. For example, if you have the following
  patch series::

    patch1
    patch2

  where patch2 depends on patch1, you do not have to list patch1 as
  prerequisite of patch2 if you have already marked patch1 for stable
  inclusion.

* Point out kernel version prerequisites::

    Cc: <stable@vger.kernel.org> # 3.3.x

  The tag has the meaning of::

    git cherry-pick <this commit>

  For each "-stable" tree starting with the specified version.

  Note, such tagging is unnecessary if the stable team can derive the
  appropriate versions from Fixes: tags.

* Delay pick up of patches::

    Cc: <stable@vger.kernel.org> # after -rc3

* Point out known problems::

    Cc: <stable@vger.kernel.org> # see patch description, needs adjustments for <= 6.3

There furthermore is a variant of the stable tag you can use to make the stable
team's backporting tools (e.g AUTOSEL or scripts that look for commits
containing a 'Fixes:' tag) ignore a change::

     Cc: <stable+noautosel@kernel.org> # reason goes here, and must be present

.. _option_2:

Option 2
********

If the patch already has been merged to mainline, send an email to
stable@vger.kernel.org containing the subject of the patch, the commit ID,
why you think it should be applied, and what kernel versions you wish it to
be applied to.

.. _option_3:

Option 3
********

Send the patch, after verifying that it follows the above rules, to
stable@vger.kernel.org and mention the kernel versions you wish it to be applied
to. When doing so, you must note the upstream commit ID in the changelog of your
submission with a separate line above the commit text, like this::

  commit <sha1> upstream.

Or alternatively::

  [ Upstream commit <sha1> ]

If the submitted patch deviates from the original upstream patch (for example
because it had to be adjusted for the older API), this must be very clearly
documented and justified in the patch description.


Following the submission
------------------------

The sender will receive an ACK when the patch has been accepted into the
queue, or a NAK if the patch is rejected.  This response might take a few
days, according to the schedules of the stable team members.

If accepted, the patch will be added to the -stable queue, for review by other
developers and by the relevant subsystem maintainer.


Review cycle
------------

- When the -stable maintainers decide for a review cycle, the patches will be
  sent to the review committee, and the maintainer of the affected area of
  the patch (unless the submitter is the maintainer of the area) and CC: to
  the linux-kernel mailing list.
- The review committee has 48 hours in which to ACK or NAK the patch.
- If the patch is rejected by a member of the committee, or linux-kernel
  members object to the patch, bringing up issues that the maintainers and
  members did not realize, the patch will be dropped from the queue.
- The ACKed patches will be posted again as part of release candidate (-rc)
  to be tested by developers and testers.
- Usually only one -rc release is made, however if there are any outstanding
  issues, some patches may be modified or dropped or additional patches may
  be queued. Additional -rc releases are then released and tested until no
  issues are found.
- Responding to the -rc releases can be done on the mailing list by sending
  a "Tested-by:" email with any testing information desired. The "Tested-by:"
  tags will be collected and added to the release commit.
- At the end of the review cycle, the new -stable release will be released
  containing all the queued and tested patches.
- Security patches will be accepted into the -stable tree directly from the
  security kernel team, and not go through the normal review cycle.
  Contact the kernel security team for more details on this procedure.


Trees
-----

- The queues of patches, for both completed versions and in progress
  versions can be found at:

    https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/stable/stable-queue.git

- The finalized and tagged releases of all stable kernels can be found
  in separate branches per version at:

    https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/stable/linux.git

- The release candidate of all stable kernel versions can be found at:

    https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/stable/linux-stable-rc.git/

  .. warning::
     The -stable-rc tree is a snapshot in time of the stable-queue tree and
     will change frequently, hence will be rebased often. It should only be
     used for testing purposes (e.g. to be consumed by CI systems).


Review committee
----------------

- This is made up of a number of kernel developers who have volunteered for
  this task, and a few that haven't.
.. _submitchecklist:

=======================================
Linux Kernel patch submission checklist
=======================================

Here are some basic things that developers should do if they want to see their
kernel patch submissions accepted more quickly.

These are all above and beyond the documentation that is provided in
:ref:`Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst <submittingpatches>`
and elsewhere regarding submitting Linux kernel patches.

Review your code
================

1) If you use a facility then #include the file that defines/declares
   that facility.  Don't depend on other header files pulling in ones
   that you use.

2) Check your patch for general style as detailed in
   :ref:`Documentation/process/coding-style.rst <codingstyle>`.

3) All memory barriers {e.g., ``barrier()``, ``rmb()``, ``wmb()``} need a
   comment in the source code that explains the logic of what they are doing
   and why.

Review Kconfig changes
======================

1) Any new or modified ``CONFIG`` options do not muck up the config menu and
   default to off unless they meet the exception criteria documented in
   ``Documentation/kbuild/kconfig-language.rst`` Menu attributes: default value.

2) All new ``Kconfig`` options have help text.

3) Has been carefully reviewed with respect to relevant ``Kconfig``
   combinations.  This is very hard to get right with testing---brainpower
   pays off here.

Provide documentation
=====================

1) Include :ref:`kernel-doc <kernel_doc>` to document global kernel APIs.
   (Not required for static functions, but OK there also.)

2) All new ``/proc`` entries are documented under ``Documentation/``

3) All new kernel boot parameters are documented in
   ``Documentation/admin-guide/kernel-parameters.rst``.

4) All new module parameters are documented with ``MODULE_PARM_DESC()``

5) All new userspace interfaces are documented in ``Documentation/ABI/``.
   See ``Documentation/ABI/README`` for more information.
   Patches that change userspace interfaces should be CCed to
   linux-api@vger.kernel.org.

6) If any ioctl's are added by the patch, then also update
   ``Documentation/userspace-api/ioctl/ioctl-number.rst``.

Check your code with tools
==========================

1) Check for trivial violations with the patch style checker prior to
   submission (``scripts/checkpatch.pl``).
   You should be able to justify all violations that remain in
   your patch.

2) Check cleanly with sparse.

3) Use ``make checkstack`` and fix any problems that it finds.
   Note that ``checkstack`` does not point out problems explicitly,
   but any one function that uses more than 512 bytes on the stack is a
   candidate for change.

Build your code
===============

1) Builds cleanly:

  a) with applicable or modified ``CONFIG`` options ``=y``, ``=m``, and
     ``=n``.  No ``gcc`` warnings/errors, no linker warnings/errors.

  b) Passes ``allnoconfig``, ``allmodconfig``

  c) Builds successfully when using ``O=builddir``

  d) Any Documentation/ changes build successfully without new warnings/errors.
     Use ``make htmldocs`` or ``make pdfdocs`` to check the build and
     fix any issues.

2) Builds on multiple CPU architectures by using local cross-compile tools
   or some other build farm. Note that ppc64 is a good architecture for
   cross-compilation checking because it tends to use ``unsigned long`` for
   64-bit quantities.

3) Newly-added code has been compiled with ``gcc -W`` (use
   ``make KCFLAGS=-W``).  This will generate lots of noise, but is good
   for finding bugs like "warning: comparison between signed and unsigned".

4) If your modified source code depends on or uses any of the kernel
   APIs or features that are related to the following ``Kconfig`` symbols,
   then test multiple builds with the related ``Kconfig`` symbols disabled
   and/or ``=m`` (if that option is available) [not all of these at the
   same time, just various/random combinations of them]:

   ``CONFIG_SMP``, ``CONFIG_SYSFS``, ``CONFIG_PROC_FS``, ``CONFIG_INPUT``,
   ``CONFIG_PCI``, ``CONFIG_BLOCK``, ``CONFIG_PM``, ``CONFIG_MAGIC_SYSRQ``,
   ``CONFIG_NET``, ``CONFIG_INET=n`` (but latter with ``CONFIG_NET=y``).

Test your code
==============

1) Has been tested with ``CONFIG_PREEMPT``, ``CONFIG_DEBUG_PREEMPT``,
   ``CONFIG_SLUB_DEBUG``, ``CONFIG_DEBUG_PAGEALLOC``, ``CONFIG_DEBUG_MUTEXES``,
   ``CONFIG_DEBUG_SPINLOCK``, ``CONFIG_DEBUG_ATOMIC_SLEEP``,
   ``CONFIG_PROVE_RCU`` and ``CONFIG_DEBUG_OBJECTS_RCU_HEAD`` all
   simultaneously enabled.

2) Has been build- and runtime tested with and without ``CONFIG_SMP`` and
   ``CONFIG_PREEMPT.``

3) All codepaths have been exercised with all lockdep features enabled.

4) Has been checked with injection of at least slab and page-allocation
   failures.  See ``Documentation/fault-injection/``.
   If the new code is substantial, addition of subsystem-specific fault
   injection might be appropriate.

5) Tested with the most recent tag of linux-next to make sure that it still
   works with all of the other queued patches and various changes in the VM,
   VFS, and other subsystems.
.. _submittingpatches:

Submitting patches: the essential guide to getting your code into the kernel
============================================================================

For a person or company who wishes to submit a change to the Linux
kernel, the process can sometimes be daunting if you're not familiar
with "the system."  This text is a collection of suggestions which
can greatly increase the chances of your change being accepted.

This document contains a large number of suggestions in a relatively terse
format.  For detailed information on how the kernel development process
works, see Documentation/process/development-process.rst. Also, read
Documentation/process/submit-checklist.rst
for a list of items to check before submitting code.
For device tree binding patches, read
Documentation/devicetree/bindings/submitting-patches.rst.

This documentation assumes that you're using ``git`` to prepare your patches.
If you're unfamiliar with ``git``, you would be well-advised to learn how to
use it, it will make your life as a kernel developer and in general much
easier.

Some subsystems and maintainer trees have additional information about
their workflow and expectations, see
:ref:`Documentation/process/maintainer-handbooks.rst <maintainer_handbooks_main>`.

Obtain a current source tree
----------------------------

If you do not have a repository with the current kernel source handy, use
``git`` to obtain one.  You'll want to start with the mainline repository,
which can be grabbed with::

  git clone git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git

Note, however, that you may not want to develop against the mainline tree
directly.  Most subsystem maintainers run their own trees and want to see
patches prepared against those trees.  See the **T:** entry for the subsystem
in the MAINTAINERS file to find that tree, or simply ask the maintainer if
the tree is not listed there.

.. _describe_changes:

Describe your changes
---------------------

Describe your problem.  Whether your patch is a one-line bug fix or
5000 lines of a new feature, there must be an underlying problem that
motivated you to do this work.  Convince the reviewer that there is a
problem worth fixing and that it makes sense for them to read past the
first paragraph.

Describe user-visible impact.  Straight up crashes and lockups are
pretty convincing, but not all bugs are that blatant.  Even if the
problem was spotted during code review, describe the impact you think
it can have on users.  Keep in mind that the majority of Linux
installations run kernels from secondary stable trees or
vendor/product-specific trees that cherry-pick only specific patches
from upstream, so include anything that could help route your change
downstream: provoking circumstances, excerpts from dmesg, crash
descriptions, performance regressions, latency spikes, lockups, etc.

Quantify optimizations and trade-offs.  If you claim improvements in
performance, memory consumption, stack footprint, or binary size,
include numbers that back them up.  But also describe non-obvious
costs.  Optimizations usually aren't free but trade-offs between CPU,
memory, and readability; or, when it comes to heuristics, between
different workloads.  Describe the expected downsides of your
optimization so that the reviewer can weigh costs against benefits.

Once the problem is established, describe what you are actually doing
about it in technical detail.  It's important to describe the change
in plain English for the reviewer to verify that the code is behaving
as you intend it to.

The maintainer will thank you if you write your patch description in a
form which can be easily pulled into Linux's source code management
system, ``git``, as a "commit log".  See :ref:`the_canonical_patch_format`.

Solve only one problem per patch.  If your description starts to get
long, that's a sign that you probably need to split up your patch.
See :ref:`split_changes`.

When you submit or resubmit a patch or patch series, include the
complete patch description and justification for it.  Don't just
say that this is version N of the patch (series).  Don't expect the
subsystem maintainer to refer back to earlier patch versions or referenced
URLs to find the patch description and put that into the patch.
I.e., the patch (series) and its description should be self-contained.
This benefits both the maintainers and reviewers.  Some reviewers
probably didn't even receive earlier versions of the patch.

Describe your changes in imperative mood, e.g. "make xyzzy do frotz"
instead of "[This patch] makes xyzzy do frotz" or "[I] changed xyzzy
to do frotz", as if you are giving orders to the codebase to change
its behaviour.

If you want to refer to a specific commit, don't just refer to the
SHA-1 ID of the commit. Please also include the oneline summary of
the commit, to make it easier for reviewers to know what it is about.
Example::

	Commit e21d2170f36602ae2708 ("video: remove unnecessary
	platform_set_drvdata()") removed the unnecessary
	platform_set_drvdata(), but left the variable "dev" unused,
	delete it.

You should also be sure to use at least the first twelve characters of the
SHA-1 ID.  The kernel repository holds a *lot* of objects, making
collisions with shorter IDs a real possibility.  Bear in mind that, even if
there is no collision with your six-character ID now, that condition may
change five years from now.

If related discussions or any other background information behind the change
can be found on the web, add 'Link:' tags pointing to it. If the patch is a
result of some earlier mailing list discussions or something documented on the
web, point to it.

When linking to mailing list archives, preferably use the lore.kernel.org
message archiver service. To create the link URL, use the contents of the
``Message-ID`` header of the message without the surrounding angle brackets.
For example::

    Link: https://lore.kernel.org/30th.anniversary.repost@klaava.Helsinki.FI

Please check the link to make sure that it is actually working and points
to the relevant message.

However, try to make your explanation understandable without external
resources. In addition to giving a URL to a mailing list archive or bug,
summarize the relevant points of the discussion that led to the
patch as submitted.

In case your patch fixes a bug, use the 'Closes:' tag with a URL referencing
the report in the mailing list archives or a public bug tracker. For example::

	Closes: https://example.com/issues/1234

Some bug trackers have the ability to close issues automatically when a
commit with such a tag is applied. Some bots monitoring mailing lists can
also track such tags and take certain actions. Private bug trackers and
invalid URLs are forbidden.

If your patch fixes a bug in a specific commit, e.g. you found an issue using
``git bisect``, please use the 'Fixes:' tag with the first 12 characters of
the SHA-1 ID, and the one line summary.  Do not split the tag across multiple
lines, tags are exempt from the "wrap at 75 columns" rule in order to simplify
parsing scripts.  For example::

	Fixes: 54a4f0239f2e ("KVM: MMU: make kvm_mmu_zap_page() return the number of pages it actually freed")

The following ``git config`` settings can be used to add a pretty format for
outputting the above style in the ``git log`` or ``git show`` commands::

	[core]
		abbrev = 12
	[pretty]
		fixes = Fixes: %h (\"%s\")

An example call::

	$ git log -1 --pretty=fixes 54a4f0239f2e
	Fixes: 54a4f0239f2e ("KVM: MMU: make kvm_mmu_zap_page() return the number of pages it actually freed")

.. _split_changes:

Separate your changes
---------------------

Separate each **logical change** into a separate patch.

For example, if your changes include both bug fixes and performance
enhancements for a single driver, separate those changes into two
or more patches.  If your changes include an API update, and a new
driver which uses that new API, separate those into two patches.

On the other hand, if you make a single change to numerous files,
group those changes into a single patch.  Thus a single logical change
is contained within a single patch.

The point to remember is that each patch should make an easily understood
change that can be verified by reviewers.  Each patch should be justifiable
on its own merits.

If one patch depends on another patch in order for a change to be
complete, that is OK.  Simply note **"this patch depends on patch X"**
in your patch description.

When dividing your change into a series of patches, take special care to
ensure that the kernel builds and runs properly after each patch in the
series.  Developers using ``git bisect`` to track down a problem can end up
splitting your patch series at any point; they will not thank you if you
introduce bugs in the middle.

If you cannot condense your patch set into a smaller set of patches,
then only post say 15 or so at a time and wait for review and integration.



Style-check your changes
------------------------

Check your patch for basic style violations, details of which can be
found in Documentation/process/coding-style.rst.
Failure to do so simply wastes
the reviewers time and will get your patch rejected, probably
without even being read.

One significant exception is when moving code from one file to
another -- in this case you should not modify the moved code at all in
the same patch which moves it.  This clearly delineates the act of
moving the code and your changes.  This greatly aids review of the
actual differences and allows tools to better track the history of
the code itself.

Check your patches with the patch style checker prior to submission
(scripts/checkpatch.pl).  Note, though, that the style checker should be
viewed as a guide, not as a replacement for human judgment.  If your code
looks better with a violation then its probably best left alone.

The checker reports at three levels:
 - ERROR: things that are very likely to be wrong
 - WARNING: things requiring careful review
 - CHECK: things requiring thought

You should be able to justify all violations that remain in your
patch.


Select the recipients for your patch
------------------------------------

You should always copy the appropriate subsystem maintainer(s) and list(s) on
any patch to code that they maintain; look through the MAINTAINERS file and the
source code revision history to see who those maintainers are.  The script
scripts/get_maintainer.pl can be very useful at this step (pass paths to your
patches as arguments to scripts/get_maintainer.pl).  If you cannot find a
maintainer for the subsystem you are working on, Andrew Morton
(akpm@linux-foundation.org) serves as a maintainer of last resort.

linux-kernel@vger.kernel.org should be used by default for all patches, but the
volume on that list has caused a number of developers to tune it out.  Please
do not spam unrelated lists and unrelated people, though.

Many kernel-related lists are hosted at kernel.org; you can find a list
of them at https://subspace.kernel.org.  There are kernel-related lists
hosted elsewhere as well, though.

Linus Torvalds is the final arbiter of all changes accepted into the
Linux kernel.  His e-mail address is <torvalds@linux-foundation.org>.
He gets a lot of e-mail, and, at this point, very few patches go through
Linus directly, so typically you should do your best to -avoid-
sending him e-mail.

If you have a patch that fixes an exploitable security bug, send that patch
to security@kernel.org.  For severe bugs, a short embargo may be considered
to allow distributors to get the patch out to users; in such cases,
obviously, the patch should not be sent to any public lists. See also
Documentation/process/security-bugs.rst.

Patches that fix a severe bug in a released kernel should be directed
toward the stable maintainers by putting a line like this::

  Cc: stable@vger.kernel.org

into the sign-off area of your patch (note, NOT an email recipient).  You
should also read Documentation/process/stable-kernel-rules.rst
in addition to this document.

If changes affect userland-kernel interfaces, please send the MAN-PAGES
maintainer (as listed in the MAINTAINERS file) a man-pages patch, or at
least a notification of the change, so that some information makes its way
into the manual pages.  User-space API changes should also be copied to
linux-api@vger.kernel.org.


No MIME, no links, no compression, no attachments.  Just plain text
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Linus and other kernel developers need to be able to read and comment
on the changes you are submitting.  It is important for a kernel
developer to be able to "quote" your changes, using standard e-mail
tools, so that they may comment on specific portions of your code.

For this reason, all patches should be submitted by e-mail "inline". The
easiest way to do this is with ``git send-email``, which is strongly
recommended.  An interactive tutorial for ``git send-email`` is available at
https://git-send-email.io.

If you choose not to use ``git send-email``:

.. warning::

  Be wary of your editor's word-wrap corrupting your patch,
  if you choose to cut-n-paste your patch.

Do not attach the patch as a MIME attachment, compressed or not.
Many popular e-mail applications will not always transmit a MIME
attachment as plain text, making it impossible to comment on your
code.  A MIME attachment also takes Linus a bit more time to process,
decreasing the likelihood of your MIME-attached change being accepted.

Exception:  If your mailer is mangling patches then someone may ask
you to re-send them using MIME.

See Documentation/process/email-clients.rst for hints about configuring
your e-mail client so that it sends your patches untouched.

Respond to review comments
--------------------------

Your patch will almost certainly get comments from reviewers on ways in
which the patch can be improved, in the form of a reply to your email. You must
respond to those comments; ignoring reviewers is a good way to get ignored in
return. You can simply reply to their emails to answer their comments. Review
comments or questions that do not lead to a code change should almost certainly
bring about a comment or changelog entry so that the next reviewer better
understands what is going on.

Be sure to tell the reviewers what changes you are making and to thank them
for their time.  Code review is a tiring and time-consuming process, and
reviewers sometimes get grumpy.  Even in that case, though, respond
politely and address the problems they have pointed out.  When sending a next
version, add a ``patch changelog`` to the cover letter or to individual patches
explaining difference against previous submission (see
:ref:`the_canonical_patch_format`).
Notify people that commented on your patch about new versions by adding them to
the patches CC list.

See Documentation/process/email-clients.rst for recommendations on email
clients and mailing list etiquette.

.. _interleaved_replies:

Use trimmed interleaved replies in email discussions
----------------------------------------------------
Top-posting is strongly discouraged in Linux kernel development
discussions. Interleaved (or "inline") replies make conversations much
easier to follow. For more details see:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Posting_style#Interleaved_style

As is frequently quoted on the mailing list::

  A: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Top_post
  Q: Were do I find info about this thing called top-posting?
  A: Because it messes up the order in which people normally read text.
  Q: Why is top-posting such a bad thing?
  A: Top-posting.
  Q: What is the most annoying thing in e-mail?

Similarly, please trim all unneeded quotations that aren't relevant
to your reply. This makes responses easier to find, and saves time and
space. For more details see: http://daringfireball.net/2007/07/on_top ::

  A: No.
  Q: Should I include quotations after my reply?

.. _resend_reminders:

Don't get discouraged - or impatient
------------------------------------

After you have submitted your change, be patient and wait.  Reviewers are
busy people and may not get to your patch right away.

Once upon a time, patches used to disappear into the void without comment,
but the development process works more smoothly than that now.  You should
receive comments within a few weeks (typically 2-3); if that does not
happen, make sure that you have sent your patches to the right place.
Wait for a minimum of one week before resubmitting or pinging reviewers
- possibly longer during busy times like merge windows.

It's also ok to resend the patch or the patch series after a couple of
weeks with the word "RESEND" added to the subject line::

   [PATCH Vx RESEND] sub/sys: Condensed patch summary

Don't add "RESEND" when you are submitting a modified version of your
patch or patch series - "RESEND" only applies to resubmission of a
patch or patch series which have not been modified in any way from the
previous submission.


Include PATCH in the subject
-----------------------------

Due to high e-mail traffic to Linus, and to linux-kernel, it is common
convention to prefix your subject line with [PATCH].  This lets Linus
and other kernel developers more easily distinguish patches from other
e-mail discussions.

``git send-email`` will do this for you automatically.


Sign your work - the Developer's Certificate of Origin
------------------------------------------------------

To improve tracking of who did what, especially with patches that can
percolate to their final resting place in the kernel through several
layers of maintainers, we've introduced a "sign-off" procedure on
patches that are being emailed around.

The sign-off is a simple line at the end of the explanation for the
patch, which certifies that you wrote it or otherwise have the right to
pass it on as an open-source patch.  The rules are pretty simple: if you
can certify the below:

Developer's Certificate of Origin 1.1
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

        (a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I
            have the right to submit it under the open source license
            indicated in the file; or

        (b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best
            of my knowledge, is covered under an appropriate open source
            license and I have the right under that license to submit that
            work with modifications, whether created in whole or in part
            by me, under the same open source license (unless I am
            permitted to submit under a different license), as indicated
            in the file; or

        (c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other
            person who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified
            it.

        (d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution
            are public and that a record of the contribution (including all
            personal information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is
            maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with
            this project or the open source license(s) involved.

then you just add a line saying::

	Signed-off-by: Random J Developer <random@developer.example.org>

using a known identity (sorry, no anonymous contributions.)
This will be done for you automatically if you use ``git commit -s``.
Reverts should also include "Signed-off-by". ``git revert -s`` does that
for you.

Some people also put extra tags at the end.  They'll just be ignored for
now, but you can do this to mark internal company procedures or just
point out some special detail about the sign-off.

Any further SoBs (Signed-off-by:'s) following the author's SoB are from
people handling and transporting the patch, but were not involved in its
development. SoB chains should reflect the **real** route a patch took
as it was propagated to the maintainers and ultimately to Linus, with
the first SoB entry signalling primary authorship of a single author.


When to use Acked-by:, Cc:, and Co-developed-by:
------------------------------------------------

The Signed-off-by: tag indicates that the signer was involved in the
development of the patch, or that he/she was in the patch's delivery path.

If a person was not directly involved in the preparation or handling of a
patch but wishes to signify and record their approval of it then they can
ask to have an Acked-by: line added to the patch's changelog.

Acked-by: is often used by the maintainer of the affected code when that
maintainer neither contributed to nor forwarded the patch.

Acked-by: is not as formal as Signed-off-by:.  It is a record that the acker
has at least reviewed the patch and has indicated acceptance.  Hence patch
mergers will sometimes manually convert an acker's "yep, looks good to me"
into an Acked-by: (but note that it is usually better to ask for an
explicit ack).

Acked-by: does not necessarily indicate acknowledgement of the entire patch.
For example, if a patch affects multiple subsystems and has an Acked-by: from
one subsystem maintainer then this usually indicates acknowledgement of just
the part which affects that maintainer's code.  Judgement should be used here.
When in doubt people should refer to the original discussion in the mailing
list archives.

If a person has had the opportunity to comment on a patch, but has not
provided such comments, you may optionally add a ``Cc:`` tag to the patch.
This is the only tag which might be added without an explicit action by the
person it names - but it should indicate that this person was copied on the
patch.  This tag documents that potentially interested parties
have been included in the discussion.

Co-developed-by: states that the patch was co-created by multiple developers;
it is used to give attribution to co-authors (in addition to the author
attributed by the From: tag) when several people work on a single patch.  Since
Co-developed-by: denotes authorship, every Co-developed-by: must be immediately
followed by a Signed-off-by: of the associated co-author.  Standard sign-off
procedure applies, i.e. the ordering of Signed-off-by: tags should reflect the
chronological history of the patch insofar as possible, regardless of whether
the author is attributed via From: or Co-developed-by:.  Notably, the last
Signed-off-by: must always be that of the developer submitting the patch.

Note, the From: tag is optional when the From: author is also the person (and
email) listed in the From: line of the email header.

Example of a patch submitted by the From: author::

	<changelog>

	Co-developed-by: First Co-Author <first@coauthor.example.org>
	Signed-off-by: First Co-Author <first@coauthor.example.org>
	Co-developed-by: Second Co-Author <second@coauthor.example.org>
	Signed-off-by: Second Co-Author <second@coauthor.example.org>
	Signed-off-by: From Author <from@author.example.org>

Example of a patch submitted by a Co-developed-by: author::

	From: From Author <from@author.example.org>

	<changelog>

	Co-developed-by: Random Co-Author <random@coauthor.example.org>
	Signed-off-by: Random Co-Author <random@coauthor.example.org>
	Signed-off-by: From Author <from@author.example.org>
	Co-developed-by: Submitting Co-Author <sub@coauthor.example.org>
	Signed-off-by: Submitting Co-Author <sub@coauthor.example.org>


Using Reported-by:, Tested-by:, Reviewed-by:, Suggested-by: and Fixes:
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Reported-by tag gives credit to people who find bugs and report them and it
hopefully inspires them to help us again in the future. The tag is intended for
bugs; please do not use it to credit feature requests. The tag should be
followed by a Closes: tag pointing to the report, unless the report is not
available on the web. The Link: tag can be used instead of Closes: if the patch
fixes a part of the issue(s) being reported. Please note that if the bug was
reported in private, then ask for permission first before using the Reported-by
tag.

A Tested-by: tag indicates that the patch has been successfully tested (in
some environment) by the person named.  This tag informs maintainers that
some testing has been performed, provides a means to locate testers for
future patches, and ensures credit for the testers.

Reviewed-by:, instead, indicates that the patch has been reviewed and found
acceptable according to the Reviewer's Statement:

Reviewer's statement of oversight
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By offering my Reviewed-by: tag, I state that:

	 (a) I have carried out a technical review of this patch to
	     evaluate its appropriateness and readiness for inclusion into
	     the mainline kernel.

	 (b) Any problems, concerns, or questions relating to the patch
	     have been communicated back to the submitter.  I am satisfied
	     with the submitter's response to my comments.

	 (c) While there may be things that could be improved with this
	     submission, I believe that it is, at this time, (1) a
	     worthwhile modification to the kernel, and (2) free of known
	     issues which would argue against its inclusion.

	 (d) While I have reviewed the patch and believe it to be sound, I
	     do not (unless explicitly stated elsewhere) make any
	     warranties or guarantees that it will achieve its stated
	     purpose or function properly in any given situation.

A Reviewed-by tag is a statement of opinion that the patch is an
appropriate modification of the kernel without any remaining serious
technical issues.  Any interested reviewer (who has done the work) can
offer a Reviewed-by tag for a patch.  This tag serves to give credit to
reviewers and to inform maintainers of the degree of review which has been
done on the patch.  Reviewed-by: tags, when supplied by reviewers known to
understand the subject area and to perform thorough reviews, will normally
increase the likelihood of your patch getting into the kernel.

Both Tested-by and Reviewed-by tags, once received on mailing list from tester
or reviewer, should be added by author to the applicable patches when sending
next versions.  However if the patch has changed substantially in following
version, these tags might not be applicable anymore and thus should be removed.
Usually removal of someone's Tested-by or Reviewed-by tags should be mentioned
in the patch changelog (after the '---' separator).

A Suggested-by: tag indicates that the patch idea is suggested by the person
named and ensures credit to the person for the idea. Please note that this
tag should not be added without the reporter's permission, especially if the
idea was not posted in a public forum. That said, if we diligently credit our
idea reporters, they will, hopefully, be inspired to help us again in the
future.

A Fixes: tag indicates that the patch fixes an issue in a previous commit. It
is used to make it easy to determine where a bug originated, which can help
review a bug fix. This tag also assists the stable kernel team in determining
which stable kernel versions should receive your fix. This is the preferred
method for indicating a bug fixed by the patch. See :ref:`describe_changes`
for more details.

Note: Attaching a Fixes: tag does not subvert the stable kernel rules
process nor the requirement to Cc: stable@vger.kernel.org on all stable
patch candidates. For more information, please read
Documentation/process/stable-kernel-rules.rst.

.. _the_canonical_patch_format:

The canonical patch format
--------------------------

This section describes how the patch itself should be formatted.  Note
that, if you have your patches stored in a ``git`` repository, proper patch
formatting can be had with ``git format-patch``.  The tools cannot create
the necessary text, though, so read the instructions below anyway.

The canonical patch subject line is::

    Subject: [PATCH 001/123] subsystem: summary phrase

The canonical patch message body contains the following:

  - A ``from`` line specifying the patch author, followed by an empty
    line (only needed if the person sending the patch is not the author).

  - The body of the explanation, line wrapped at 75 columns, which will
    be copied to the permanent changelog to describe this patch.

  - An empty line.

  - The ``Signed-off-by:`` lines, described above, which will
    also go in the changelog.

  - A marker line containing simply ``---``.

  - Any additional comments not suitable for the changelog.

  - The actual patch (``diff`` output).

The Subject line format makes it very easy to sort the emails
alphabetically by subject line - pretty much any email reader will
support that - since because the sequence number is zero-padded,
the numerical and alphabetic sort is the same.

The ``subsystem`` in the email's Subject should identify which
area or subsystem of the kernel is being patched.

The ``summary phrase`` in the email's Subject should concisely
describe the patch which that email contains.  The ``summary
phrase`` should not be a filename.  Do not use the same ``summary
phrase`` for every patch in a whole patch series (where a ``patch
series`` is an ordered sequence of multiple, related patches).

Bear in mind that the ``summary phrase`` of your email becomes a
globally-unique identifier for that patch.  It propagates all the way
into the ``git`` changelog.  The ``summary phrase`` may later be used in
developer discussions which refer to the patch.  People will want to
google for the ``summary phrase`` to read discussion regarding that
patch.  It will also be the only thing that people may quickly see
when, two or three months later, they are going through perhaps
thousands of patches using tools such as ``gitk`` or ``git log
--oneline``.

For these reasons, the ``summary`` must be no more than 70-75
characters, and it must describe both what the patch changes, as well
as why the patch might be necessary.  It is challenging to be both
succinct and descriptive, but that is what a well-written summary
should do.

The ``summary phrase`` may be prefixed by tags enclosed in square
brackets: "Subject: [PATCH <tag>...] <summary phrase>".  The tags are
not considered part of the summary phrase, but describe how the patch
should be treated.  Common tags might include a version descriptor if
the multiple versions of the patch have been sent out in response to
comments (i.e., "v1, v2, v3"), or "RFC" to indicate a request for
comments.

If there are four patches in a patch series the individual patches may
be numbered like this: 1/4, 2/4, 3/4, 4/4. This assures that developers
understand the order in which the patches should be applied and that
they have reviewed or applied all of the patches in the patch series.

Here are some good example Subjects::

    Subject: [PATCH 2/5] ext2: improve scalability of bitmap searching
    Subject: [PATCH v2 01/27] x86: fix eflags tracking
    Subject: [PATCH v2] sub/sys: Condensed patch summary
    Subject: [PATCH v2 M/N] sub/sys: Condensed patch summary

The ``from`` line must be the very first line in the message body,
and has the form:

        From: Patch Author <author@example.com>

The ``from`` line specifies who will be credited as the author of the
patch in the permanent changelog.  If the ``from`` line is missing,
then the ``From:`` line from the email header will be used to determine
the patch author in the changelog.

The explanation body will be committed to the permanent source
changelog, so should make sense to a competent reader who has long since
forgotten the immediate details of the discussion that might have led to
this patch. Including symptoms of the failure which the patch addresses
(kernel log messages, oops messages, etc.) are especially useful for
people who might be searching the commit logs looking for the applicable
patch. The text should be written in such detail so that when read
weeks, months or even years later, it can give the reader the needed
details to grasp the reasoning for **why** the patch was created.

If a patch fixes a compile failure, it may not be necessary to include
_all_ of the compile failures; just enough that it is likely that
someone searching for the patch can find it. As in the ``summary
phrase``, it is important to be both succinct as well as descriptive.

The ``---`` marker line serves the essential purpose of marking for
patch handling tools where the changelog message ends.

One good use for the additional comments after the ``---`` marker is
for a ``diffstat``, to show what files have changed, and the number of
inserted and deleted lines per file. A ``diffstat`` is especially useful
on bigger patches. If you are going to include a ``diffstat`` after the
``---`` marker, please use ``diffstat`` options ``-p 1 -w 70`` so that
filenames are listed from the top of the kernel source tree and don't
use too much horizontal space (easily fit in 80 columns, maybe with some
indentation). (``git`` generates appropriate diffstats by default.)

Other comments relevant only to the moment or the maintainer, not
suitable for the permanent changelog, should also go here. A good
example of such comments might be ``patch changelogs`` which describe
what has changed between the v1 and v2 version of the patch.

Please put this information **after** the ``---`` line which separates
the changelog from the rest of the patch. The version information is
not part of the changelog which gets committed to the git tree. It is
additional information for the reviewers. If it's placed above the
commit tags, it needs manual interaction to remove it. If it is below
the separator line, it gets automatically stripped off when applying the
patch::

  <commit message>
  ...
  Signed-off-by: Author <author@mail>
  ---
  V2 -> V3: Removed redundant helper function
  V1 -> V2: Cleaned up coding style and addressed review comments

  path/to/file | 5+++--
  ...

See more details on the proper patch format in the following
references.

.. _backtraces:

Backtraces in commit messages
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Backtraces help document the call chain leading to a problem. However,
not all backtraces are helpful. For example, early boot call chains are
unique and obvious. Copying the full dmesg output verbatim, however,
adds distracting information like timestamps, module lists, register and
stack dumps.

Therefore, the most useful backtraces should distill the relevant
information from the dump, which makes it easier to focus on the real
issue. Here is an example of a well-trimmed backtrace::

  unchecked MSR access error: WRMSR to 0xd51 (tried to write 0x0000000000000064)
  at rIP: 0xffffffffae059994 (native_write_msr+0x4/0x20)
  Call Trace:
  mba_wrmsr
  update_domains
  rdtgroup_mkdir

.. _explicit_in_reply_to:

Explicit In-Reply-To headers
----------------------------

It can be helpful to manually add In-Reply-To: headers to a patch
(e.g., when using ``git send-email``) to associate the patch with
previous relevant discussion, e.g. to link a bug fix to the email with
the bug report.  However, for a multi-patch series, it is generally
best to avoid using In-Reply-To: to link to older versions of the
series.  This way multiple versions of the patch don't become an
unmanageable forest of references in email clients.  If a link is
helpful, you can use the https://lore.kernel.org/ redirector (e.g., in
the cover email text) to link to an earlier version of the patch series.


Providing base tree information
-------------------------------

When other developers receive your patches and start the review process,
it is absolutely necessary for them to know what is the base
commit/branch your work applies on, considering the sheer amount of
maintainer trees present nowadays. Note again the **T:** entry in the
MAINTAINERS file explained above.

This is even more important for automated CI processes that attempt to
run a series of tests in order to establish the quality of your
submission before the maintainer starts the review.

If you are using ``git format-patch`` to generate your patches, you can
automatically include the base tree information in your submission by
using the ``--base`` flag. The easiest and most convenient way to use
this option is with topical branches::

    $ git checkout -t -b my-topical-branch master
    Branch 'my-topical-branch' set up to track local branch 'master'.
    Switched to a new branch 'my-topical-branch'

    [perform your edits and commits]

    $ git format-patch --base=auto --cover-letter -o outgoing/ master
    outgoing/0000-cover-letter.patch
    outgoing/0001-First-Commit.patch
    outgoing/...

When you open ``outgoing/0000-cover-letter.patch`` for editing, you will
notice that it will have the ``base-commit:`` trailer at the very
bottom, which provides the reviewer and the CI tools enough information
to properly perform ``git am`` without worrying about conflicts::

    $ git checkout -b patch-review [base-commit-id]
    Switched to a new branch 'patch-review'
    $ git am patches.mbox
    Applying: First Commit
    Applying: ...

Please see ``man git-format-patch`` for more information about this
option.

.. note::

    The ``--base`` feature was introduced in git version 2.9.0.

If you are not using git to format your patches, you can still include
the same ``base-commit`` trailer to indicate the commit hash of the tree
on which your work is based. You should add it either in the cover
letter or in the first patch of the series and it should be placed
either below the ``---`` line or at the very bottom of all other
content, right before your email signature.

Make sure that base commit is in an official maintainer/mainline tree
and not in some internal, accessible only to you tree - otherwise it
would be worthless.

Tooling
-------

Many of the technical aspects of this process can be automated using
b4, documented at <https://b4.docs.kernel.org/en/latest/>. This can
help with things like tracking dependencies, running checkpatch and
with formatting and sending mails.

References
----------

Andrew Morton, "The perfect patch" (tpp).
  <https://www.ozlabs.org/~akpm/stuff/tpp.txt>

Jeff Garzik, "Linux kernel patch submission format".
  <https://web.archive.org/web/20180829112450/http://linux.yyz.us/patch-format.html>

Greg Kroah-Hartman, "How to piss off a kernel subsystem maintainer".
  <http://www.kroah.com/log/linux/maintainer.html>

  <http://www.kroah.com/log/linux/maintainer-02.html>

  <http://www.kroah.com/log/linux/maintainer-03.html>

  <http://www.kroah.com/log/linux/maintainer-04.html>

  <http://www.kroah.com/log/linux/maintainer-05.html>

  <http://www.kroah.com/log/linux/maintainer-06.html>

Kernel Documentation/process/coding-style.rst

Linus Torvalds's mail on the canonical patch format:
  <https://lore.kernel.org/r/Pine.LNX.4.58.0504071023190.28951@ppc970.osdl.org>

Andi Kleen, "On submitting kernel patches"
  Some strategies to get difficult or controversial changes in.

  http://halobates.de/on-submitting-patches.pdf

.. _volatile_considered_harmful:

Why the "volatile" type class should not be used
------------------------------------------------

C programmers have often taken volatile to mean that the variable could be
changed outside of the current thread of execution; as a result, they are
sometimes tempted to use it in kernel code when shared data structures are
being used.  In other words, they have been known to treat volatile types
as a sort of easy atomic variable, which they are not.  The use of volatile in
kernel code is almost never correct; this document describes why.

The key point to understand with regard to volatile is that its purpose is
to suppress optimization, which is almost never what one really wants to
do.  In the kernel, one must protect shared data structures against
unwanted concurrent access, which is very much a different task.  The
process of protecting against unwanted concurrency will also avoid almost
all optimization-related problems in a more efficient way.

Like volatile, the kernel primitives which make concurrent access to data
safe (spinlocks, mutexes, memory barriers, etc.) are designed to prevent
unwanted optimization.  If they are being used properly, there will be no
need to use volatile as well.  If volatile is still necessary, there is
almost certainly a bug in the code somewhere.  In properly-written kernel
code, volatile can only serve to slow things down.

Consider a typical block of kernel code::

    spin_lock(&the_lock);
    do_something_on(&shared_data);
    do_something_else_with(&shared_data);
    spin_unlock(&the_lock);

If all the code follows the locking rules, the value of shared_data cannot
change unexpectedly while the_lock is held.  Any other code which might
want to play with that data will be waiting on the lock.  The spinlock
primitives act as memory barriers - they are explicitly written to do so -
meaning that data accesses will not be optimized across them.  So the
compiler might think it knows what will be in shared_data, but the
spin_lock() call, since it acts as a memory barrier, will force it to
forget anything it knows.  There will be no optimization problems with
accesses to that data.

If shared_data were declared volatile, the locking would still be
necessary.  But the compiler would also be prevented from optimizing access
to shared_data _within_ the critical section, when we know that nobody else
can be working with it.  While the lock is held, shared_data is not
volatile.  When dealing with shared data, proper locking makes volatile
unnecessary - and potentially harmful.

The volatile storage class was originally meant for memory-mapped I/O
registers.  Within the kernel, register accesses, too, should be protected
by locks, but one also does not want the compiler "optimizing" register
accesses within a critical section.  But, within the kernel, I/O memory
accesses are always done through accessor functions; accessing I/O memory
directly through pointers is frowned upon and does not work on all
architectures.  Those accessors are written to prevent unwanted
optimization, so, once again, volatile is unnecessary.

Another situation where one might be tempted to use volatile is
when the processor is busy-waiting on the value of a variable.  The right
way to perform a busy wait is::

    while (my_variable != what_i_want)
        cpu_relax();

The cpu_relax() call can lower CPU power consumption or yield to a
hyperthreaded twin processor; it also happens to serve as a compiler
barrier, so, once again, volatile is unnecessary.  Of course, busy-
waiting is generally an anti-social act to begin with.

There are still a few rare situations where volatile makes sense in the
kernel:

  - The above-mentioned accessor functions might use volatile on
    architectures where direct I/O memory access does work.  Essentially,
    each accessor call becomes a little critical section on its own and
    ensures that the access happens as expected by the programmer.

  - Inline assembly code which changes memory, but which has no other
    visible side effects, risks being deleted by GCC.  Adding the volatile
    keyword to asm statements will prevent this removal.

  - The jiffies variable is special in that it can have a different value
    every time it is referenced, but it can be read without any special
    locking.  So jiffies can be volatile, but the addition of other
    variables of this type is strongly frowned upon.  Jiffies is considered
    to be a "stupid legacy" issue (Linus's words) in this regard; fixing it
    would be more trouble than it is worth.

  - Pointers to data structures in coherent memory which might be modified
    by I/O devices can, sometimes, legitimately be volatile.  A ring buffer
    used by a network adapter, where that adapter changes pointers to
    indicate which descriptors have been processed, is an example of this
    type of situation.

For most code, none of the above justifications for volatile apply.  As a
result, the use of volatile is likely to be seen as a bug and will bring
additional scrutiny to the code.  Developers who are tempted to use
volatile should take a step back and think about what they are truly trying
to accomplish.

Patches to remove volatile variables are generally welcome - as long as
they come with a justification which shows that the concurrency issues have
been properly thought through.


References
==========

[1] https://lwn.net/Articles/233481/

[2] https://lwn.net/Articles/233482/

Credits
=======

Original impetus and research by Randy Dunlap

Written by Jonathan Corbet

Improvements via comments from Satyam Sharma, Johannes Stezenbach, Jesper
Juhl, Heikki Orsila, H. Peter Anvin, Philipp Hahn, and Stefan
Richter.
Assembler Annotations
=====================

Copyright (c) 2017-2019 Jiri Slaby

This document describes the new macros for annotation of data and code in
assembly. In particular, it contains information about ``SYM_FUNC_START``,
``SYM_FUNC_END``, ``SYM_CODE_START``, and similar.

Rationale
---------
Some code like entries, trampolines, or boot code needs to be written in
assembly. The same as in C, such code is grouped into functions and
accompanied with data. Standard assemblers do not force users into precisely
marking these pieces as code, data, or even specifying their length.
Nevertheless, assemblers provide developers with such annotations to aid
debuggers throughout assembly. On top of that, developers also want to mark
some functions as *global* in order to be visible outside of their translation
units.

Over time, the Linux kernel has adopted macros from various projects (like
``binutils``) to facilitate such annotations. So for historic reasons,
developers have been using ``ENTRY``, ``END``, ``ENDPROC``, and other
annotations in assembly.  Due to the lack of their documentation, the macros
are used in rather wrong contexts at some locations. Clearly, ``ENTRY`` was
intended to denote the beginning of global symbols (be it data or code).
``END`` used to mark the end of data or end of special functions with
*non-standard* calling convention. In contrast, ``ENDPROC`` should annotate
only ends of *standard* functions.

When these macros are used correctly, they help assemblers generate a nice
object with both sizes and types set correctly. For example, the result of
``arch/x86/lib/putuser.S``::

   Num:    Value          Size Type    Bind   Vis      Ndx Name
    25: 0000000000000000    33 FUNC    GLOBAL DEFAULT    1 __put_user_1
    29: 0000000000000030    37 FUNC    GLOBAL DEFAULT    1 __put_user_2
    32: 0000000000000060    36 FUNC    GLOBAL DEFAULT    1 __put_user_4
    35: 0000000000000090    37 FUNC    GLOBAL DEFAULT    1 __put_user_8

This is not only important for debugging purposes. When there are properly
annotated objects like this, tools can be run on them to generate more useful
information. In particular, on properly annotated objects, ``objtool`` can be
run to check and fix the object if needed. Currently, ``objtool`` can report
missing frame pointer setup/destruction in functions. It can also
automatically generate annotations for the ORC unwinder
(Documentation/arch/x86/orc-unwinder.rst)
for most code. Both of these are especially important to support reliable
stack traces which are in turn necessary for kernel live patching
(Documentation/livepatch/livepatch.rst).

Caveat and Discussion
---------------------
As one might realize, there were only three macros previously. That is indeed
insufficient to cover all the combinations of cases:

* standard/non-standard function
* code/data
* global/local symbol

There was a discussion_ and instead of extending the current ``ENTRY/END*``
macros, it was decided that brand new macros should be introduced instead::

    So how about using macro names that actually show the purpose, instead
    of importing all the crappy, historic, essentially randomly chosen
    debug symbol macro names from the binutils and older kernels?

.. _discussion: https://lore.kernel.org/r/20170217104757.28588-1-jslaby@suse.cz

Macros Description
------------------

The new macros are prefixed with the ``SYM_`` prefix and can be divided into
three main groups:

1. ``SYM_FUNC_*`` -- to annotate C-like functions. This means functions with
   standard C calling conventions. For example, on x86, this means that the
   stack contains a return address at the predefined place and a return from
   the function can happen in a standard way. When frame pointers are enabled,
   save/restore of frame pointer shall happen at the start/end of a function,
   respectively, too.

   Checking tools like ``objtool`` should ensure such marked functions conform
   to these rules. The tools can also easily annotate these functions with
   debugging information (like *ORC data*) automatically.

2. ``SYM_CODE_*`` -- special functions called with special stack. Be it
   interrupt handlers with special stack content, trampolines, or startup
   functions.

   Checking tools mostly ignore checking of these functions. But some debug
   information still can be generated automatically. For correct debug data,
   this code needs hints like ``UNWIND_HINT_REGS`` provided by developers.

3. ``SYM_DATA*`` -- obviously data belonging to ``.data`` sections and not to
   ``.text``. Data do not contain instructions, so they have to be treated
   specially by the tools: they should not treat the bytes as instructions,
   nor assign any debug information to them.

Instruction Macros
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
This section covers ``SYM_FUNC_*`` and ``SYM_CODE_*`` enumerated above.

``objtool`` requires that all code must be contained in an ELF symbol. Symbol
names that have a ``.L`` prefix do not emit symbol table entries. ``.L``
prefixed symbols can be used within a code region, but should be avoided for
denoting a range of code via ``SYM_*_START/END`` annotations.

* ``SYM_FUNC_START`` and ``SYM_FUNC_START_LOCAL`` are supposed to be **the
  most frequent markings**. They are used for functions with standard calling
  conventions -- global and local. Like in C, they both align the functions to
  architecture specific ``__ALIGN`` bytes. There are also ``_NOALIGN`` variants
  for special cases where developers do not want this implicit alignment.

  ``SYM_FUNC_START_WEAK`` and ``SYM_FUNC_START_WEAK_NOALIGN`` markings are
  also offered as an assembler counterpart to the *weak* attribute known from
  C.

  All of these **shall** be coupled with ``SYM_FUNC_END``. First, it marks
  the sequence of instructions as a function and computes its size to the
  generated object file. Second, it also eases checking and processing such
  object files as the tools can trivially find exact function boundaries.

  So in most cases, developers should write something like in the following
  example, having some asm instructions in between the macros, of course::

    SYM_FUNC_START(memset)
        ... asm insns ...
    SYM_FUNC_END(memset)

  In fact, this kind of annotation corresponds to the now deprecated ``ENTRY``
  and ``ENDPROC`` macros.

* ``SYM_FUNC_ALIAS``, ``SYM_FUNC_ALIAS_LOCAL``, and ``SYM_FUNC_ALIAS_WEAK`` can
  be used to define multiple names for a function. The typical use is::

    SYM_FUNC_START(__memset)
        ... asm insns ...
    SYN_FUNC_END(__memset)
    SYM_FUNC_ALIAS(memset, __memset)

  In this example, one can call ``__memset`` or ``memset`` with the same
  result, except the debug information for the instructions is generated to
  the object file only once -- for the non-``ALIAS`` case.

* ``SYM_CODE_START`` and ``SYM_CODE_START_LOCAL`` should be used only in
  special cases -- if you know what you are doing. This is used exclusively
  for interrupt handlers and similar where the calling convention is not the C
  one. ``_NOALIGN`` variants exist too. The use is the same as for the ``FUNC``
  category above::

    SYM_CODE_START_LOCAL(bad_put_user)
        ... asm insns ...
    SYM_CODE_END(bad_put_user)

  Again, every ``SYM_CODE_START*`` **shall** be coupled by ``SYM_CODE_END``.

  To some extent, this category corresponds to deprecated ``ENTRY`` and
  ``END``. Except ``END`` had several other meanings too.

* ``SYM_INNER_LABEL*`` is used to denote a label inside some
  ``SYM_{CODE,FUNC}_START`` and ``SYM_{CODE,FUNC}_END``.  They are very similar
  to C labels, except they can be made global. An example of use::

    SYM_CODE_START(ftrace_caller)
        /* save_mcount_regs fills in first two parameters */
        ...

    SYM_INNER_LABEL(ftrace_caller_op_ptr, SYM_L_GLOBAL)
        /* Load the ftrace_ops into the 3rd parameter */
        ...

    SYM_INNER_LABEL(ftrace_call, SYM_L_GLOBAL)
        call ftrace_stub
        ...
        retq
    SYM_CODE_END(ftrace_caller)

Data Macros
~~~~~~~~~~~
Similar to instructions, there is a couple of macros to describe data in the
assembly.

* ``SYM_DATA_START`` and ``SYM_DATA_START_LOCAL`` mark the start of some data
  and shall be used in conjunction with either ``SYM_DATA_END``, or
  ``SYM_DATA_END_LABEL``. The latter adds also a label to the end, so that
  people can use ``lstack`` and (local) ``lstack_end`` in the following
  example::

    SYM_DATA_START_LOCAL(lstack)
        .skip 4096
    SYM_DATA_END_LABEL(lstack, SYM_L_LOCAL, lstack_end)

* ``SYM_DATA`` and ``SYM_DATA_LOCAL`` are variants for simple, mostly one-line
  data::

    SYM_DATA(HEAP,     .long rm_heap)
    SYM_DATA(heap_end, .long rm_stack)

  In the end, they expand to ``SYM_DATA_START`` with ``SYM_DATA_END``
  internally.

Support Macros
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
All the above reduce themselves to some invocation of ``SYM_START``,
``SYM_END``, or ``SYM_ENTRY`` at last. Normally, developers should avoid using
these.

Further, in the above examples, one could see ``SYM_L_LOCAL``. There are also
``SYM_L_GLOBAL`` and ``SYM_L_WEAK``. All are intended to denote linkage of a
symbol marked by them. They are used either in ``_LABEL`` variants of the
earlier macros, or in ``SYM_START``.


Overriding Macros
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Architecture can also override any of the macros in their own
``asm/linkage.h``, including macros specifying the type of a symbol
(``SYM_T_FUNC``, ``SYM_T_OBJECT``, and ``SYM_T_NONE``).  As every macro
described in this file is surrounded by ``#ifdef`` + ``#endif``, it is enough
to define the macros differently in the aforementioned architecture-dependent
header.
========================================
Generic Associative Array Implementation
========================================

Overview
========

This associative array implementation is an object container with the following
properties:

1. Objects are opaque pointers.  The implementation does not care where they
   point (if anywhere) or what they point to (if anything).

   .. note::

      Pointers to objects _must_ be zero in the least significant bit.

2. Objects do not need to contain linkage blocks for use by the array.  This
   permits an object to be located in multiple arrays simultaneously.
   Rather, the array is made up of metadata blocks that point to objects.

3. Objects require index keys to locate them within the array.

4. Index keys must be unique.  Inserting an object with the same key as one
   already in the array will replace the old object.

5. Index keys can be of any length and can be of different lengths.

6. Index keys should encode the length early on, before any variation due to
   length is seen.

7. Index keys can include a hash to scatter objects throughout the array.

8. The array can iterated over.  The objects will not necessarily come out in
   key order.

9. The array can be iterated over while it is being modified, provided the
   RCU readlock is being held by the iterator.  Note, however, under these
   circumstances, some objects may be seen more than once.  If this is a
   problem, the iterator should lock against modification.  Objects will not
   be missed, however, unless deleted.

10. Objects in the array can be looked up by means of their index key.

11. Objects can be looked up while the array is being modified, provided the
    RCU readlock is being held by the thread doing the look up.

The implementation uses a tree of 16-pointer nodes internally that are indexed
on each level by nibbles from the index key in the same manner as in a radix
tree.  To improve memory efficiency, shortcuts can be emplaced to skip over
what would otherwise be a series of single-occupancy nodes.  Further, nodes
pack leaf object pointers into spare space in the node rather than making an
extra branch until as such time an object needs to be added to a full node.


The Public API
==============

The public API can be found in ``<linux/assoc_array.h>``.  The associative
array is rooted on the following structure::

    struct assoc_array {
            ...
    };

The code is selected by enabling ``CONFIG_ASSOCIATIVE_ARRAY`` with::

    ./script/config -e ASSOCIATIVE_ARRAY


Edit Script
-----------

The insertion and deletion functions produce an 'edit script' that can later be
applied to effect the changes without risking ``ENOMEM``. This retains the
preallocated metadata blocks that will be installed in the internal tree and
keeps track of the metadata blocks that will be removed from the tree when the
script is applied.

This is also used to keep track of dead blocks and dead objects after the
script has been applied so that they can be freed later.  The freeing is done
after an RCU grace period has passed - thus allowing access functions to
proceed under the RCU read lock.

The script appears as outside of the API as a pointer of the type::

    struct assoc_array_edit;

There are two functions for dealing with the script:

1. Apply an edit script::

    void assoc_array_apply_edit(struct assoc_array_edit *edit);

This will perform the edit functions, interpolating various write barriers
to permit accesses under the RCU read lock to continue.  The edit script
will then be passed to ``call_rcu()`` to free it and any dead stuff it points
to.

2. Cancel an edit script::

    void assoc_array_cancel_edit(struct assoc_array_edit *edit);

This frees the edit script and all preallocated memory immediately. If
this was for insertion, the new object is _not_ released by this function,
but must rather be released by the caller.

These functions are guaranteed not to fail.


Operations Table
----------------

Various functions take a table of operations::

    struct assoc_array_ops {
            ...
    };

This points to a number of methods, all of which need to be provided:

1. Get a chunk of index key from caller data::

    unsigned long (*get_key_chunk)(const void *index_key, int level);

This should return a chunk of caller-supplied index key starting at the
*bit* position given by the level argument.  The level argument will be a
multiple of ``ASSOC_ARRAY_KEY_CHUNK_SIZE`` and the function should return
``ASSOC_ARRAY_KEY_CHUNK_SIZE bits``.  No error is possible.


2. Get a chunk of an object's index key::

    unsigned long (*get_object_key_chunk)(const void *object, int level);

As the previous function, but gets its data from an object in the array
rather than from a caller-supplied index key.


3. See if this is the object we're looking for::

    bool (*compare_object)(const void *object, const void *index_key);

Compare the object against an index key and return ``true`` if it matches and
``false`` if it doesn't.


4. Diff the index keys of two objects::

    int (*diff_objects)(const void *object, const void *index_key);

Return the bit position at which the index key of the specified object
differs from the given index key or -1 if they are the same.


5. Free an object::

    void (*free_object)(void *object);

Free the specified object.  Note that this may be called an RCU grace period
after ``assoc_array_apply_edit()`` was called, so ``synchronize_rcu()`` may be
necessary on module unloading.


Manipulation Functions
----------------------

There are a number of functions for manipulating an associative array:

1. Initialise an associative array::

    void assoc_array_init(struct assoc_array *array);

This initialises the base structure for an associative array.  It can't fail.


2. Insert/replace an object in an associative array::

    struct assoc_array_edit *
    assoc_array_insert(struct assoc_array *array,
                       const struct assoc_array_ops *ops,
                       const void *index_key,
                       void *object);

This inserts the given object into the array.  Note that the least
significant bit of the pointer must be zero as it's used to type-mark
pointers internally.

If an object already exists for that key then it will be replaced with the
new object and the old one will be freed automatically.

The ``index_key`` argument should hold index key information and is
passed to the methods in the ops table when they are called.

This function makes no alteration to the array itself, but rather returns
an edit script that must be applied.  ``-ENOMEM`` is returned in the case of
an out-of-memory error.

The caller should lock exclusively against other modifiers of the array.


3. Delete an object from an associative array::

    struct assoc_array_edit *
    assoc_array_delete(struct assoc_array *array,
                       const struct assoc_array_ops *ops,
                       const void *index_key);

This deletes an object that matches the specified data from the array.

The ``index_key`` argument should hold index key information and is
passed to the methods in the ops table when they are called.

This function makes no alteration to the array itself, but rather returns
an edit script that must be applied.  ``-ENOMEM`` is returned in the case of
an out-of-memory error.  ``NULL`` will be returned if the specified object is
not found within the array.

The caller should lock exclusively against other modifiers of the array.


4. Delete all objects from an associative array::

    struct assoc_array_edit *
    assoc_array_clear(struct assoc_array *array,
                      const struct assoc_array_ops *ops);

This deletes all the objects from an associative array and leaves it
completely empty.

This function makes no alteration to the array itself, but rather returns
an edit script that must be applied.  ``-ENOMEM`` is returned in the case of
an out-of-memory error.

The caller should lock exclusively against other modifiers of the array.


5. Destroy an associative array, deleting all objects::

    void assoc_array_destroy(struct assoc_array *array,
                             const struct assoc_array_ops *ops);

This destroys the contents of the associative array and leaves it
completely empty.  It is not permitted for another thread to be traversing
the array under the RCU read lock at the same time as this function is
destroying it as no RCU deferral is performed on memory release -
something that would require memory to be allocated.

The caller should lock exclusively against other modifiers and accessors
of the array.


6. Garbage collect an associative array::

    int assoc_array_gc(struct assoc_array *array,
                       const struct assoc_array_ops *ops,
                       bool (*iterator)(void *object, void *iterator_data),
                       void *iterator_data);

This iterates over the objects in an associative array and passes each one to
``iterator()``.  If ``iterator()`` returns ``true``, the object is kept.  If it
returns ``false``, the object will be freed.  If the ``iterator()`` function
returns ``true``, it must perform any appropriate refcount incrementing on the
object before returning.

The internal tree will be packed down if possible as part of the iteration
to reduce the number of nodes in it.

The ``iterator_data`` is passed directly to ``iterator()`` and is otherwise
ignored by the function.

The function will return ``0`` if successful and ``-ENOMEM`` if there wasn't
enough memory.

It is possible for other threads to iterate over or search the array under
the RCU read lock while this function is in progress.  The caller should
lock exclusively against other modifiers of the array.


Access Functions
----------------

There are two functions for accessing an associative array:

1. Iterate over all the objects in an associative array::

    int assoc_array_iterate(const struct assoc_array *array,
                            int (*iterator)(const void *object,
                                            void *iterator_data),
                            void *iterator_data);

This passes each object in the array to the iterator callback function.
``iterator_data`` is private data for that function.

This may be used on an array at the same time as the array is being
modified, provided the RCU read lock is held.  Under such circumstances,
it is possible for the iteration function to see some objects twice.  If
this is a problem, then modification should be locked against.  The
iteration algorithm should not, however, miss any objects.

The function will return ``0`` if no objects were in the array or else it will
return the result of the last iterator function called.  Iteration stops
immediately if any call to the iteration function results in a non-zero
return.


2. Find an object in an associative array::

    void *assoc_array_find(const struct assoc_array *array,
                           const struct assoc_array_ops *ops,
                           const void *index_key);

This walks through the array's internal tree directly to the object
specified by the index key..

This may be used on an array at the same time as the array is being
modified, provided the RCU read lock is held.

The function will return the object if found (and set ``*_type`` to the object
type) or will return ``NULL`` if the object was not found.


Index Key Form
--------------

The index key can be of any form, but since the algorithms aren't told how long
the key is, it is strongly recommended that the index key includes its length
very early on before any variation due to the length would have an effect on
comparisons.

This will cause leaves with different length keys to scatter away from each
other - and those with the same length keys to cluster together.

It is also recommended that the index key begin with a hash of the rest of the
key to maximise scattering throughout keyspace.

The better the scattering, the wider and lower the internal tree will be.

Poor scattering isn't too much of a problem as there are shortcuts and nodes
can contain mixtures of leaves and metadata pointers.

The index key is read in chunks of machine word.  Each chunk is subdivided into
one nibble (4 bits) per level, so on a 32-bit CPU this is good for 8 levels and
on a 64-bit CPU, 16 levels.  Unless the scattering is really poor, it is
unlikely that more than one word of any particular index key will have to be
used.


Internal Workings
=================

The associative array data structure has an internal tree.  This tree is
constructed of two types of metadata blocks: nodes and shortcuts.

A node is an array of slots.  Each slot can contain one of four things:

* A NULL pointer, indicating that the slot is empty.
* A pointer to an object (a leaf).
* A pointer to a node at the next level.
* A pointer to a shortcut.


Basic Internal Tree Layout
--------------------------

Ignoring shortcuts for the moment, the nodes form a multilevel tree.  The index
key space is strictly subdivided by the nodes in the tree and nodes occur on
fixed levels.  For example::

 Level: 0               1               2               3
        =============== =============== =============== ===============
                                                        NODE D
                        NODE B          NODE C  +------>+---+
                +------>+---+   +------>+---+   |       | 0 |
        NODE A  |       | 0 |   |       | 0 |   |       +---+
        +---+   |       +---+   |       +---+   |       :   :
        | 0 |   |       :   :   |       :   :   |       +---+
        +---+   |       +---+   |       +---+   |       | f |
        | 1 |---+       | 3 |---+       | 7 |---+       +---+
        +---+           +---+           +---+
        :   :           :   :           | 8 |---+
        +---+           +---+           +---+   |       NODE E
        | e |---+       | f |           :   :   +------>+---+
        +---+   |       +---+           +---+           | 0 |
        | f |   |                       | f |           +---+
        +---+   |                       +---+           :   :
                |       NODE F                          +---+
                +------>+---+                           | f |
                        | 0 |           NODE G          +---+
                        +---+   +------>+---+
                        :   :   |       | 0 |
                        +---+   |       +---+
                        | 6 |---+       :   :
                        +---+           +---+
                        :   :           | f |
                        +---+           +---+
                        | f |
                        +---+

In the above example, there are 7 nodes (A-G), each with 16 slots (0-f).
Assuming no other meta data nodes in the tree, the key space is divided
thusly::

    KEY PREFIX      NODE
    ==========      ====
    137*            D
    138*            E
    13[0-69-f]*     C
    1[0-24-f]*      B
    e6*             G
    e[0-57-f]*      F
    [02-df]*        A

So, for instance, keys with the following example index keys will be found in
the appropriate nodes::

    INDEX KEY       PREFIX  NODE
    =============== ======= ====
    13694892892489  13      C
    13795289025897  137     D
    13889dde88793   138     E
    138bbb89003093  138     E
    1394879524789   12      C
    1458952489      1       B
    9431809de993ba  -       A
    b4542910809cd   -       A
    e5284310def98   e       F
    e68428974237    e6      G
    e7fffcbd443     e       F
    f3842239082     -       A

To save memory, if a node can hold all the leaves in its portion of keyspace,
then the node will have all those leaves in it and will not have any metadata
pointers - even if some of those leaves would like to be in the same slot.

A node can contain a heterogeneous mix of leaves and metadata pointers.
Metadata pointers must be in the slots that match their subdivisions of key
space.  The leaves can be in any slot not occupied by a metadata pointer.  It
is guaranteed that none of the leaves in a node will match a slot occupied by a
metadata pointer.  If the metadata pointer is there, any leaf whose key matches
the metadata key prefix must be in the subtree that the metadata pointer points
to.

In the above example list of index keys, node A will contain::

    SLOT    CONTENT         INDEX KEY (PREFIX)
    ====    =============== ==================
    1       PTR TO NODE B   1*
    any     LEAF            9431809de993ba
    any     LEAF            b4542910809cd
    e       PTR TO NODE F   e*
    any     LEAF            f3842239082

and node B::

    3	PTR TO NODE C	13*
    any	LEAF		1458952489


Shortcuts
---------

Shortcuts are metadata records that jump over a piece of keyspace.  A shortcut
is a replacement for a series of single-occupancy nodes ascending through the
levels.  Shortcuts exist to save memory and to speed up traversal.

It is possible for the root of the tree to be a shortcut - say, for example,
the tree contains at least 17 nodes all with key prefix ``1111``.  The
insertion algorithm will insert a shortcut to skip over the ``1111`` keyspace
in a single bound and get to the fourth level where these actually become
different.


Splitting And Collapsing Nodes
------------------------------

Each node has a maximum capacity of 16 leaves and metadata pointers.  If the
insertion algorithm finds that it is trying to insert a 17th object into a
node, that node will be split such that at least two leaves that have a common
key segment at that level end up in a separate node rooted on that slot for
that common key segment.

If the leaves in a full node and the leaf that is being inserted are
sufficiently similar, then a shortcut will be inserted into the tree.

When the number of objects in the subtree rooted at a node falls to 16 or
fewer, then the subtree will be collapsed down to a single node - and this will
ripple towards the root if possible.


Non-Recursive Iteration
-----------------------

Each node and shortcut contains a back pointer to its parent and the number of
slot in that parent that points to it.  None-recursive iteration uses these to
proceed rootwards through the tree, going to the parent node, slot N + 1 to
make sure progress is made without the need for a stack.

The backpointers, however, make simultaneous alteration and iteration tricky.


Simultaneous Alteration And Iteration
-------------------------------------

There are a number of cases to consider:

1. Simple insert/replace.  This involves simply replacing a NULL or old
   matching leaf pointer with the pointer to the new leaf after a barrier.
   The metadata blocks don't change otherwise.  An old leaf won't be freed
   until after the RCU grace period.

2. Simple delete.  This involves just clearing an old matching leaf.  The
   metadata blocks don't change otherwise.  The old leaf won't be freed until
   after the RCU grace period.

3. Insertion replacing part of a subtree that we haven't yet entered.  This
   may involve replacement of part of that subtree - but that won't affect
   the iteration as we won't have reached the pointer to it yet and the
   ancestry blocks are not replaced (the layout of those does not change).

4. Insertion replacing nodes that we're actively processing.  This isn't a
   problem as we've passed the anchoring pointer and won't switch onto the
   new layout until we follow the back pointers - at which point we've
   already examined the leaves in the replaced node (we iterate over all the
   leaves in a node before following any of its metadata pointers).

   We might, however, re-see some leaves that have been split out into a new
   branch that's in a slot further along than we were at.

5. Insertion replacing nodes that we're processing a dependent branch of.
   This won't affect us until we follow the back pointers.  Similar to (4).

6. Deletion collapsing a branch under us.  This doesn't affect us because the
   back pointers will get us back to the parent of the new node before we
   could see the new node.  The entire collapsed subtree is thrown away
   unchanged - and will still be rooted on the same slot, so we shouldn't
   process it a second time as we'll go back to slot + 1.

.. note::

   Under some circumstances, we need to simultaneously change the parent
   pointer and the parent slot pointer on a node (say, for example, we
   inserted another node before it and moved it up a level).  We cannot do
   this without locking against a read - so we have to replace that node too.

   However, when we're changing a shortcut into a node this isn't a problem
   as shortcuts only have one slot and so the parent slot number isn't used
   when traversing backwards over one.  This means that it's okay to change
   the slot number first - provided suitable barriers are used to make sure
   the parent slot number is read after the back pointer.

Obsolete blocks and leaves are freed up after an RCU grace period has passed,
so as long as anyone doing walking or iteration holds the RCU read lock, the
old superstructure should not go away on them.
===========================
Boot time memory management
===========================

Early system initialization cannot use "normal" memory management
simply because it is not set up yet. But there is still need to
allocate memory for various data structures, for instance for the
physical page allocator.

A specialized allocator called ``memblock`` performs the
boot time memory management. The architecture specific initialization
must set it up in :c:func:`setup_arch` and tear it down in
:c:func:`mem_init` functions.

Once the early memory management is available it offers a variety of
functions and macros for memory allocations. The allocation request
may be directed to the first (and probably the only) node or to a
particular node in a NUMA system. There are API variants that panic
when an allocation fails and those that don't.

Memblock also offers a variety of APIs that control its own behaviour.

Memblock Overview
=================

.. kernel-doc:: mm/memblock.c
   :doc: memblock overview


Functions and structures
========================

Here is the description of memblock data structures, functions and
macros. Some of them are actually internal, but since they are
documented it would be silly to omit them. Besides, reading the
descriptions for the internal functions can help to understand what
really happens under the hood.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/memblock.h
.. kernel-doc:: mm/memblock.c
   :functions:
==================================
Cache and TLB Flushing Under Linux
==================================

:Author: David S. Miller <davem@redhat.com>

This document describes the cache/tlb flushing interfaces called
by the Linux VM subsystem.  It enumerates over each interface,
describes its intended purpose, and what side effect is expected
after the interface is invoked.

The side effects described below are stated for a uniprocessor
implementation, and what is to happen on that single processor.  The
SMP cases are a simple extension, in that you just extend the
definition such that the side effect for a particular interface occurs
on all processors in the system.  Don't let this scare you into
thinking SMP cache/tlb flushing must be so inefficient, this is in
fact an area where many optimizations are possible.  For example,
if it can be proven that a user address space has never executed
on a cpu (see mm_cpumask()), one need not perform a flush
for this address space on that cpu.

First, the TLB flushing interfaces, since they are the simplest.  The
"TLB" is abstracted under Linux as something the cpu uses to cache
virtual-->physical address translations obtained from the software
page tables.  Meaning that if the software page tables change, it is
possible for stale translations to exist in this "TLB" cache.
Therefore when software page table changes occur, the kernel will
invoke one of the following flush methods _after_ the page table
changes occur:

1) ``void flush_tlb_all(void)``

	The most severe flush of all.  After this interface runs,
	any previous page table modification whatsoever will be
	visible to the cpu.

	This is usually invoked when the kernel page tables are
	changed, since such translations are "global" in nature.

2) ``void flush_tlb_mm(struct mm_struct *mm)``

	This interface flushes an entire user address space from
	the TLB.  After running, this interface must make sure that
	any previous page table modifications for the address space
	'mm' will be visible to the cpu.  That is, after running,
	there will be no entries in the TLB for 'mm'.

	This interface is used to handle whole address space
	page table operations such as what happens during
	fork, and exec.

3) ``void flush_tlb_range(struct vm_area_struct *vma,
   unsigned long start, unsigned long end)``

	Here we are flushing a specific range of (user) virtual
	address translations from the TLB.  After running, this
	interface must make sure that any previous page table
	modifications for the address space 'vma->vm_mm' in the range
	'start' to 'end-1' will be visible to the cpu.  That is, after
	running, there will be no entries in the TLB for 'mm' for
	virtual addresses in the range 'start' to 'end-1'.

	The "vma" is the backing store being used for the region.
	Primarily, this is used for munmap() type operations.

	The interface is provided in hopes that the port can find
	a suitably efficient method for removing multiple page
	sized translations from the TLB, instead of having the kernel
	call flush_tlb_page (see below) for each entry which may be
	modified.

4) ``void flush_tlb_page(struct vm_area_struct *vma, unsigned long addr)``

	This time we need to remove the PAGE_SIZE sized translation
	from the TLB.  The 'vma' is the backing structure used by
	Linux to keep track of mmap'd regions for a process, the
	address space is available via vma->vm_mm.  Also, one may
	test (vma->vm_flags & VM_EXEC) to see if this region is
	executable (and thus could be in the 'instruction TLB' in
	split-tlb type setups).

	After running, this interface must make sure that any previous
	page table modification for address space 'vma->vm_mm' for
	user virtual address 'addr' will be visible to the cpu.  That
	is, after running, there will be no entries in the TLB for
	'vma->vm_mm' for virtual address 'addr'.

	This is used primarily during fault processing.

5) ``void update_mmu_cache_range(struct vm_fault *vmf,
   struct vm_area_struct *vma, unsigned long address, pte_t *ptep,
   unsigned int nr)``

	At the end of every page fault, this routine is invoked to tell
	the architecture specific code that translations now exists
	in the software page tables for address space "vma->vm_mm"
	at virtual address "address" for "nr" consecutive pages.

	This routine is also invoked in various other places which pass
	a NULL "vmf".

	A port may use this information in any way it so chooses.
	For example, it could use this event to pre-load TLB
	translations for software managed TLB configurations.
	The sparc64 port currently does this.

Next, we have the cache flushing interfaces.  In general, when Linux
is changing an existing virtual-->physical mapping to a new value,
the sequence will be in one of the following forms::

	1) flush_cache_mm(mm);
	   change_all_page_tables_of(mm);
	   flush_tlb_mm(mm);

	2) flush_cache_range(vma, start, end);
	   change_range_of_page_tables(mm, start, end);
	   flush_tlb_range(vma, start, end);

	3) flush_cache_page(vma, addr, pfn);
	   set_pte(pte_pointer, new_pte_val);
	   flush_tlb_page(vma, addr);

The cache level flush will always be first, because this allows
us to properly handle systems whose caches are strict and require
a virtual-->physical translation to exist for a virtual address
when that virtual address is flushed from the cache.  The HyperSparc
cpu is one such cpu with this attribute.

The cache flushing routines below need only deal with cache flushing
to the extent that it is necessary for a particular cpu.  Mostly,
these routines must be implemented for cpus which have virtually
indexed caches which must be flushed when virtual-->physical
translations are changed or removed.  So, for example, the physically
indexed physically tagged caches of IA32 processors have no need to
implement these interfaces since the caches are fully synchronized
and have no dependency on translation information.

Here are the routines, one by one:

1) ``void flush_cache_mm(struct mm_struct *mm)``

	This interface flushes an entire user address space from
	the caches.  That is, after running, there will be no cache
	lines associated with 'mm'.

	This interface is used to handle whole address space
	page table operations such as what happens during exit and exec.

2) ``void flush_cache_dup_mm(struct mm_struct *mm)``

	This interface flushes an entire user address space from
	the caches.  That is, after running, there will be no cache
	lines associated with 'mm'.

	This interface is used to handle whole address space
	page table operations such as what happens during fork.

	This option is separate from flush_cache_mm to allow some
	optimizations for VIPT caches.

3) ``void flush_cache_range(struct vm_area_struct *vma,
   unsigned long start, unsigned long end)``

	Here we are flushing a specific range of (user) virtual
	addresses from the cache.  After running, there will be no
	entries in the cache for 'vma->vm_mm' for virtual addresses in
	the range 'start' to 'end-1'.

	The "vma" is the backing store being used for the region.
	Primarily, this is used for munmap() type operations.

	The interface is provided in hopes that the port can find
	a suitably efficient method for removing multiple page
	sized regions from the cache, instead of having the kernel
	call flush_cache_page (see below) for each entry which may be
	modified.

4) ``void flush_cache_page(struct vm_area_struct *vma, unsigned long addr, unsigned long pfn)``

	This time we need to remove a PAGE_SIZE sized range
	from the cache.  The 'vma' is the backing structure used by
	Linux to keep track of mmap'd regions for a process, the
	address space is available via vma->vm_mm.  Also, one may
	test (vma->vm_flags & VM_EXEC) to see if this region is
	executable (and thus could be in the 'instruction cache' in
	"Harvard" type cache layouts).

	The 'pfn' indicates the physical page frame (shift this value
	left by PAGE_SHIFT to get the physical address) that 'addr'
	translates to.  It is this mapping which should be removed from
	the cache.

	After running, there will be no entries in the cache for
	'vma->vm_mm' for virtual address 'addr' which translates
	to 'pfn'.

	This is used primarily during fault processing.

5) ``void flush_cache_kmaps(void)``

	This routine need only be implemented if the platform utilizes
	highmem.  It will be called right before all of the kmaps
	are invalidated.

	After running, there will be no entries in the cache for
	the kernel virtual address range PKMAP_ADDR(0) to
	PKMAP_ADDR(LAST_PKMAP).

	This routing should be implemented in asm/highmem.h

6) ``void flush_cache_vmap(unsigned long start, unsigned long end)``
   ``void flush_cache_vunmap(unsigned long start, unsigned long end)``

	Here in these two interfaces we are flushing a specific range
	of (kernel) virtual addresses from the cache.  After running,
	there will be no entries in the cache for the kernel address
	space for virtual addresses in the range 'start' to 'end-1'.

	The first of these two routines is invoked after vmap_range()
	has installed the page table entries.  The second is invoked
	before vunmap_range() deletes the page table entries.

There exists another whole class of cpu cache issues which currently
require a whole different set of interfaces to handle properly.
The biggest problem is that of virtual aliasing in the data cache
of a processor.

Is your port susceptible to virtual aliasing in its D-cache?
Well, if your D-cache is virtually indexed, is larger in size than
PAGE_SIZE, and does not prevent multiple cache lines for the same
physical address from existing at once, you have this problem.

If your D-cache has this problem, first define asm/shmparam.h SHMLBA
properly, it should essentially be the size of your virtually
addressed D-cache (or if the size is variable, the largest possible
size).  This setting will force the SYSv IPC layer to only allow user
processes to mmap shared memory at address which are a multiple of
this value.

.. note::

  This does not fix shared mmaps, check out the sparc64 port for
  one way to solve this (in particular SPARC_FLAG_MMAPSHARED).

Next, you have to solve the D-cache aliasing issue for all
other cases.  Please keep in mind that fact that, for a given page
mapped into some user address space, there is always at least one more
mapping, that of the kernel in its linear mapping starting at
PAGE_OFFSET.  So immediately, once the first user maps a given
physical page into its address space, by implication the D-cache
aliasing problem has the potential to exist since the kernel already
maps this page at its virtual address.

  ``void copy_user_page(void *to, void *from, unsigned long addr, struct page *page)``
  ``void clear_user_page(void *to, unsigned long addr, struct page *page)``

	These two routines store data in user anonymous or COW
	pages.  It allows a port to efficiently avoid D-cache alias
	issues between userspace and the kernel.

	For example, a port may temporarily map 'from' and 'to' to
	kernel virtual addresses during the copy.  The virtual address
	for these two pages is chosen in such a way that the kernel
	load/store instructions happen to virtual addresses which are
	of the same "color" as the user mapping of the page.  Sparc64
	for example, uses this technique.

	The 'addr' parameter tells the virtual address where the
	user will ultimately have this page mapped, and the 'page'
	parameter gives a pointer to the struct page of the target.

	If D-cache aliasing is not an issue, these two routines may
	simply call memcpy/memset directly and do nothing more.

  ``void flush_dcache_folio(struct folio *folio)``

        This routines must be called when:

	  a) the kernel did write to a page that is in the page cache page
	     and / or in high memory
	  b) the kernel is about to read from a page cache page and user space
	     shared/writable mappings of this page potentially exist.  Note
	     that {get,pin}_user_pages{_fast} already call flush_dcache_folio
	     on any page found in the user address space and thus driver
	     code rarely needs to take this into account.

	.. note::

	      This routine need only be called for page cache pages
	      which can potentially ever be mapped into the address
	      space of a user process.  So for example, VFS layer code
	      handling vfs symlinks in the page cache need not call
	      this interface at all.

	The phrase "kernel writes to a page cache page" means, specifically,
	that the kernel executes store instructions that dirty data in that
	page at the kernel virtual mapping of that page.  It is important to
	flush here to handle D-cache aliasing, to make sure these kernel stores
	are visible to user space mappings of that page.

	The corollary case is just as important, if there are users which have
	shared+writable mappings of this file, we must make sure that kernel
	reads of these pages will see the most recent stores done by the user.

	If D-cache aliasing is not an issue, this routine may simply be defined
	as a nop on that architecture.

        There is a bit set aside in folio->flags (PG_arch_1) as "architecture
	private".  The kernel guarantees that, for pagecache pages, it will
	clear this bit when such a page first enters the pagecache.

	This allows these interfaces to be implemented much more
	efficiently.  It allows one to "defer" (perhaps indefinitely) the
	actual flush if there are currently no user processes mapping this
	page.  See sparc64's flush_dcache_folio and update_mmu_cache_range
	implementations for an example of how to go about doing this.

	The idea is, first at flush_dcache_folio() time, if
	folio_flush_mapping() returns a mapping, and mapping_mapped() on that
	mapping returns %false, just mark the architecture private page
	flag bit.  Later, in update_mmu_cache_range(), a check is made
	of this flag bit, and if set the flush is done and the flag bit
	is cleared.

	.. important::

			It is often important, if you defer the flush,
			that the actual flush occurs on the same CPU
			as did the cpu stores into the page to make it
			dirty.  Again, see sparc64 for examples of how
			to deal with this.

  ``void copy_to_user_page(struct vm_area_struct *vma, struct page *page,
  unsigned long user_vaddr, void *dst, void *src, int len)``
  ``void copy_from_user_page(struct vm_area_struct *vma, struct page *page,
  unsigned long user_vaddr, void *dst, void *src, int len)``

	When the kernel needs to copy arbitrary data in and out
	of arbitrary user pages (f.e. for ptrace()) it will use
	these two routines.

	Any necessary cache flushing or other coherency operations
	that need to occur should happen here.  If the processor's
	instruction cache does not snoop cpu stores, it is very
	likely that you will need to flush the instruction cache
	for copy_to_user_page().

  ``void flush_anon_page(struct vm_area_struct *vma, struct page *page,
  unsigned long vmaddr)``

  	When the kernel needs to access the contents of an anonymous
	page, it calls this function (currently only
	get_user_pages()).  Note: flush_dcache_folio() deliberately
	doesn't work for an anonymous page.  The default
	implementation is a nop (and should remain so for all coherent
	architectures).  For incoherent architectures, it should flush
	the cache of the page at vmaddr.

  ``void flush_icache_range(unsigned long start, unsigned long end)``

  	When the kernel stores into addresses that it will execute
	out of (eg when loading modules), this function is called.

	If the icache does not snoop stores then this routine will need
	to flush it.

  ``void flush_icache_page(struct vm_area_struct *vma, struct page *page)``

	All the functionality of flush_icache_page can be implemented in
	flush_dcache_folio and update_mmu_cache_range. In the future, the hope
	is to remove this interface completely.

The final category of APIs is for I/O to deliberately aliased address
ranges inside the kernel.  Such aliases are set up by use of the
vmap/vmalloc API.  Since kernel I/O goes via physical pages, the I/O
subsystem assumes that the user mapping and kernel offset mapping are
the only aliases.  This isn't true for vmap aliases, so anything in
the kernel trying to do I/O to vmap areas must manually manage
coherency.  It must do this by flushing the vmap range before doing
I/O and invalidating it after the I/O returns.

  ``void flush_kernel_vmap_range(void *vaddr, int size)``

       flushes the kernel cache for a given virtual address range in
       the vmap area.  This is to make sure that any data the kernel
       modified in the vmap range is made visible to the physical
       page.  The design is to make this area safe to perform I/O on.
       Note that this API does *not* also flush the offset map alias
       of the area.

  ``void invalidate_kernel_vmap_range(void *vaddr, int size) invalidates``

       the cache for a given virtual address range in the vmap area
       which prevents the processor from making the cache stale by
       speculatively reading data while the I/O was occurring to the
       physical pages.  This is only necessary for data reads into the
       vmap area.
================
Circular Buffers
================

:Author: David Howells <dhowells@redhat.com>
:Author: Paul E. McKenney <paulmck@linux.ibm.com>


Linux provides a number of features that can be used to implement circular
buffering.  There are two sets of such features:

 (1) Convenience functions for determining information about power-of-2 sized
     buffers.

 (2) Memory barriers for when the producer and the consumer of objects in the
     buffer don't want to share a lock.

To use these facilities, as discussed below, there needs to be just one
producer and just one consumer.  It is possible to handle multiple producers by
serialising them, and to handle multiple consumers by serialising them.


.. Contents:

 (*) What is a circular buffer?

 (*) Measuring power-of-2 buffers.

 (*) Using memory barriers with circular buffers.
     - The producer.
     - The consumer.



What is a circular buffer?
==========================

First of all, what is a circular buffer?  A circular buffer is a buffer of
fixed, finite size into which there are two indices:

 (1) A 'head' index - the point at which the producer inserts items into the
     buffer.

 (2) A 'tail' index - the point at which the consumer finds the next item in
     the buffer.

Typically when the tail pointer is equal to the head pointer, the buffer is
empty; and the buffer is full when the head pointer is one less than the tail
pointer.

The head index is incremented when items are added, and the tail index when
items are removed.  The tail index should never jump the head index, and both
indices should be wrapped to 0 when they reach the end of the buffer, thus
allowing an infinite amount of data to flow through the buffer.

Typically, items will all be of the same unit size, but this isn't strictly
required to use the techniques below.  The indices can be increased by more
than 1 if multiple items or variable-sized items are to be included in the
buffer, provided that neither index overtakes the other.  The implementer must
be careful, however, as a region more than one unit in size may wrap the end of
the buffer and be broken into two segments.

Measuring power-of-2 buffers
============================

Calculation of the occupancy or the remaining capacity of an arbitrarily sized
circular buffer would normally be a slow operation, requiring the use of a
modulus (divide) instruction.  However, if the buffer is of a power-of-2 size,
then a much quicker bitwise-AND instruction can be used instead.

Linux provides a set of macros for handling power-of-2 circular buffers.  These
can be made use of by::

	#include <linux/circ_buf.h>

The macros are:

 (#) Measure the remaining capacity of a buffer::

	CIRC_SPACE(head_index, tail_index, buffer_size);

     This returns the amount of space left in the buffer[1] into which items
     can be inserted.


 (#) Measure the maximum consecutive immediate space in a buffer::

	CIRC_SPACE_TO_END(head_index, tail_index, buffer_size);

     This returns the amount of consecutive space left in the buffer[1] into
     which items can be immediately inserted without having to wrap back to the
     beginning of the buffer.


 (#) Measure the occupancy of a buffer::

	CIRC_CNT(head_index, tail_index, buffer_size);

     This returns the number of items currently occupying a buffer[2].


 (#) Measure the non-wrapping occupancy of a buffer::

	CIRC_CNT_TO_END(head_index, tail_index, buffer_size);

     This returns the number of consecutive items[2] that can be extracted from
     the buffer without having to wrap back to the beginning of the buffer.


Each of these macros will nominally return a value between 0 and buffer_size-1,
however:

 (1) CIRC_SPACE*() are intended to be used in the producer.  To the producer
     they will return a lower bound as the producer controls the head index,
     but the consumer may still be depleting the buffer on another CPU and
     moving the tail index.

     To the consumer it will show an upper bound as the producer may be busy
     depleting the space.

 (2) CIRC_CNT*() are intended to be used in the consumer.  To the consumer they
     will return a lower bound as the consumer controls the tail index, but the
     producer may still be filling the buffer on another CPU and moving the
     head index.

     To the producer it will show an upper bound as the consumer may be busy
     emptying the buffer.

 (3) To a third party, the order in which the writes to the indices by the
     producer and consumer become visible cannot be guaranteed as they are
     independent and may be made on different CPUs - so the result in such a
     situation will merely be a guess, and may even be negative.

Using memory barriers with circular buffers
===========================================

By using memory barriers in conjunction with circular buffers, you can avoid
the need to:

 (1) use a single lock to govern access to both ends of the buffer, thus
     allowing the buffer to be filled and emptied at the same time; and

 (2) use atomic counter operations.

There are two sides to this: the producer that fills the buffer, and the
consumer that empties it.  Only one thing should be filling a buffer at any one
time, and only one thing should be emptying a buffer at any one time, but the
two sides can operate simultaneously.


The producer
------------

The producer will look something like this::

	spin_lock(&producer_lock);

	unsigned long head = buffer->head;
	/* The spin_unlock() and next spin_lock() provide needed ordering. */
	unsigned long tail = READ_ONCE(buffer->tail);

	if (CIRC_SPACE(head, tail, buffer->size) >= 1) {
		/* insert one item into the buffer */
		struct item *item = buffer[head];

		produce_item(item);

		smp_store_release(buffer->head,
				  (head + 1) & (buffer->size - 1));

		/* wake_up() will make sure that the head is committed before
		 * waking anyone up */
		wake_up(consumer);
	}

	spin_unlock(&producer_lock);

This will instruct the CPU that the contents of the new item must be written
before the head index makes it available to the consumer and then instructs the
CPU that the revised head index must be written before the consumer is woken.

Note that wake_up() does not guarantee any sort of barrier unless something
is actually awakened.  We therefore cannot rely on it for ordering.  However,
there is always one element of the array left empty.  Therefore, the
producer must produce two elements before it could possibly corrupt the
element currently being read by the consumer.  Therefore, the unlock-lock
pair between consecutive invocations of the consumer provides the necessary
ordering between the read of the index indicating that the consumer has
vacated a given element and the write by the producer to that same element.


The Consumer
------------

The consumer will look something like this::

	spin_lock(&consumer_lock);

	/* Read index before reading contents at that index. */
	unsigned long head = smp_load_acquire(buffer->head);
	unsigned long tail = buffer->tail;

	if (CIRC_CNT(head, tail, buffer->size) >= 1) {

		/* extract one item from the buffer */
		struct item *item = buffer[tail];

		consume_item(item);

		/* Finish reading descriptor before incrementing tail. */
		smp_store_release(buffer->tail,
				  (tail + 1) & (buffer->size - 1));
	}

	spin_unlock(&consumer_lock);

This will instruct the CPU to make sure the index is up to date before reading
the new item, and then it shall make sure the CPU has finished reading the item
before it writes the new tail pointer, which will erase the item.

Note the use of READ_ONCE() and smp_load_acquire() to read the
opposition index.  This prevents the compiler from discarding and
reloading its cached value.  This isn't strictly needed if you can
be sure that the opposition index will _only_ be used the once.
The smp_load_acquire() additionally forces the CPU to order against
subsequent memory references.  Similarly, smp_store_release() is used
in both algorithms to write the thread's index.  This documents the
fact that we are writing to something that can be read concurrently,
prevents the compiler from tearing the store, and enforces ordering
against previous accesses.


Further reading
===============

See also Documentation/memory-barriers.txt for a description of Linux's memory
barrier facilities.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===========================
Scope-based Cleanup Helpers
===========================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/cleanup.h
   :doc: scope-based cleanup helpers
=========================
CPU hotplug in the Kernel
=========================

:Date: September, 2021
:Author: Sebastian Andrzej Siewior <bigeasy@linutronix.de>,
         Rusty Russell <rusty@rustcorp.com.au>,
         Srivatsa Vaddagiri <vatsa@in.ibm.com>,
         Ashok Raj <ashok.raj@intel.com>,
         Joel Schopp <jschopp@austin.ibm.com>,
	 Thomas Gleixner <tglx@linutronix.de>

Introduction
============

Modern advances in system architectures have introduced advanced error
reporting and correction capabilities in processors. There are couple OEMS that
support NUMA hardware which are hot pluggable as well, where physical node
insertion and removal require support for CPU hotplug.

Such advances require CPUs available to a kernel to be removed either for
provisioning reasons, or for RAS purposes to keep an offending CPU off
system execution path. Hence the need for CPU hotplug support in the
Linux kernel.

A more novel use of CPU-hotplug support is its use today in suspend resume
support for SMP. Dual-core and HT support makes even a laptop run SMP kernels
which didn't support these methods.


Command Line Switches
=====================
``maxcpus=n``
  Restrict boot time CPUs to *n*. Say if you have four CPUs, using
  ``maxcpus=2`` will only boot two. You can choose to bring the
  other CPUs later online.

``nr_cpus=n``
  Restrict the total amount of CPUs the kernel will support. If the number
  supplied here is lower than the number of physically available CPUs, then
  those CPUs can not be brought online later.

``possible_cpus=n``
  This option sets ``possible_cpus`` bits in ``cpu_possible_mask``.

  This option is limited to the X86 and S390 architecture.

``cpu0_hotplug``
  Allow to shutdown CPU0.

  This option is limited to the X86 architecture.

CPU maps
========

``cpu_possible_mask``
  Bitmap of possible CPUs that can ever be available in the
  system. This is used to allocate some boot time memory for per_cpu variables
  that aren't designed to grow/shrink as CPUs are made available or removed.
  Once set during boot time discovery phase, the map is static, i.e no bits
  are added or removed anytime. Trimming it accurately for your system needs
  upfront can save some boot time memory.

``cpu_online_mask``
  Bitmap of all CPUs currently online. Its set in ``__cpu_up()``
  after a CPU is available for kernel scheduling and ready to receive
  interrupts from devices. Its cleared when a CPU is brought down using
  ``__cpu_disable()``, before which all OS services including interrupts are
  migrated to another target CPU.

``cpu_present_mask``
  Bitmap of CPUs currently present in the system. Not all
  of them may be online. When physical hotplug is processed by the relevant
  subsystem (e.g ACPI) can change and new bit either be added or removed
  from the map depending on the event is hot-add/hot-remove. There are currently
  no locking rules as of now. Typical usage is to init topology during boot,
  at which time hotplug is disabled.

You really don't need to manipulate any of the system CPU maps. They should
be read-only for most use. When setting up per-cpu resources almost always use
``cpu_possible_mask`` or ``for_each_possible_cpu()`` to iterate. To macro
``for_each_cpu()`` can be used to iterate over a custom CPU mask.

Never use anything other than ``cpumask_t`` to represent bitmap of CPUs.


Using CPU hotplug
=================

The kernel option *CONFIG_HOTPLUG_CPU* needs to be enabled. It is currently
available on multiple architectures including ARM, MIPS, PowerPC and X86. The
configuration is done via the sysfs interface::

 $ ls -lh /sys/devices/system/cpu
 total 0
 drwxr-xr-x  9 root root    0 Dec 21 16:33 cpu0
 drwxr-xr-x  9 root root    0 Dec 21 16:33 cpu1
 drwxr-xr-x  9 root root    0 Dec 21 16:33 cpu2
 drwxr-xr-x  9 root root    0 Dec 21 16:33 cpu3
 drwxr-xr-x  9 root root    0 Dec 21 16:33 cpu4
 drwxr-xr-x  9 root root    0 Dec 21 16:33 cpu5
 drwxr-xr-x  9 root root    0 Dec 21 16:33 cpu6
 drwxr-xr-x  9 root root    0 Dec 21 16:33 cpu7
 drwxr-xr-x  2 root root    0 Dec 21 16:33 hotplug
 -r--r--r--  1 root root 4.0K Dec 21 16:33 offline
 -r--r--r--  1 root root 4.0K Dec 21 16:33 online
 -r--r--r--  1 root root 4.0K Dec 21 16:33 possible
 -r--r--r--  1 root root 4.0K Dec 21 16:33 present

The files *offline*, *online*, *possible*, *present* represent the CPU masks.
Each CPU folder contains an *online* file which controls the logical on (1) and
off (0) state. To logically shutdown CPU4::

 $ echo 0 > /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu4/online
  smpboot: CPU 4 is now offline

Once the CPU is shutdown, it will be removed from */proc/interrupts*,
*/proc/cpuinfo* and should also not be shown visible by the *top* command. To
bring CPU4 back online::

 $ echo 1 > /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu4/online
 smpboot: Booting Node 0 Processor 4 APIC 0x1

The CPU is usable again. This should work on all CPUs, but CPU0 is often special
and excluded from CPU hotplug.

The CPU hotplug coordination
============================

The offline case
----------------

Once a CPU has been logically shutdown the teardown callbacks of registered
hotplug states will be invoked, starting with ``CPUHP_ONLINE`` and terminating
at state ``CPUHP_OFFLINE``. This includes:

* If tasks are frozen due to a suspend operation then *cpuhp_tasks_frozen*
  will be set to true.
* All processes are migrated away from this outgoing CPU to new CPUs.
  The new CPU is chosen from each process' current cpuset, which may be
  a subset of all online CPUs.
* All interrupts targeted to this CPU are migrated to a new CPU
* timers are also migrated to a new CPU
* Once all services are migrated, kernel calls an arch specific routine
  ``__cpu_disable()`` to perform arch specific cleanup.


The CPU hotplug API
===================

CPU hotplug state machine
-------------------------

CPU hotplug uses a trivial state machine with a linear state space from
CPUHP_OFFLINE to CPUHP_ONLINE. Each state has a startup and a teardown
callback.

When a CPU is onlined, the startup callbacks are invoked sequentially until
the state CPUHP_ONLINE is reached. They can also be invoked when the
callbacks of a state are set up or an instance is added to a multi-instance
state.

When a CPU is offlined the teardown callbacks are invoked in the reverse
order sequentially until the state CPUHP_OFFLINE is reached. They can also
be invoked when the callbacks of a state are removed or an instance is
removed from a multi-instance state.

If a usage site requires only a callback in one direction of the hotplug
operations (CPU online or CPU offline) then the other not-required callback
can be set to NULL when the state is set up.

The state space is divided into three sections:

* The PREPARE section

  The PREPARE section covers the state space from CPUHP_OFFLINE to
  CPUHP_BRINGUP_CPU.

  The startup callbacks in this section are invoked before the CPU is
  started during a CPU online operation. The teardown callbacks are invoked
  after the CPU has become dysfunctional during a CPU offline operation.

  The callbacks are invoked on a control CPU as they can't obviously run on
  the hotplugged CPU which is either not yet started or has become
  dysfunctional already.

  The startup callbacks are used to setup resources which are required to
  bring a CPU successfully online. The teardown callbacks are used to free
  resources or to move pending work to an online CPU after the hotplugged
  CPU became dysfunctional.

  The startup callbacks are allowed to fail. If a callback fails, the CPU
  online operation is aborted and the CPU is brought down to the previous
  state (usually CPUHP_OFFLINE) again.

  The teardown callbacks in this section are not allowed to fail.

* The STARTING section

  The STARTING section covers the state space between CPUHP_BRINGUP_CPU + 1
  and CPUHP_AP_ONLINE.

  The startup callbacks in this section are invoked on the hotplugged CPU
  with interrupts disabled during a CPU online operation in the early CPU
  setup code. The teardown callbacks are invoked with interrupts disabled
  on the hotplugged CPU during a CPU offline operation shortly before the
  CPU is completely shut down.

  The callbacks in this section are not allowed to fail.

  The callbacks are used for low level hardware initialization/shutdown and
  for core subsystems.

* The ONLINE section

  The ONLINE section covers the state space between CPUHP_AP_ONLINE + 1 and
  CPUHP_ONLINE.

  The startup callbacks in this section are invoked on the hotplugged CPU
  during a CPU online operation. The teardown callbacks are invoked on the
  hotplugged CPU during a CPU offline operation.

  The callbacks are invoked in the context of the per CPU hotplug thread,
  which is pinned on the hotplugged CPU. The callbacks are invoked with
  interrupts and preemption enabled.

  The callbacks are allowed to fail. When a callback fails the hotplug
  operation is aborted and the CPU is brought back to the previous state.

CPU online/offline operations
-----------------------------

A successful online operation looks like this::

  [CPUHP_OFFLINE]
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 1]->startup()       -> success
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 2]->startup()       -> success
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 3]                  -> skipped because startup == NULL
  ...
  [CPUHP_BRINGUP_CPU]->startup()       -> success
  === End of PREPARE section
  [CPUHP_BRINGUP_CPU + 1]->startup()   -> success
  ...
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE]->startup()         -> success
  === End of STARTUP section
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE + 1]->startup()     -> success
  ...
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - 1]->startup()        -> success
  [CPUHP_ONLINE]

A successful offline operation looks like this::

  [CPUHP_ONLINE]
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - 1]->teardown()       -> success
  ...
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE + 1]->teardown()    -> success
  === Start of STARTUP section
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE]->teardown()        -> success
  ...
  [CPUHP_BRINGUP_ONLINE - 1]->teardown()
  ...
  === Start of PREPARE section
  [CPUHP_BRINGUP_CPU]->teardown()
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 3]->teardown()
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 2]                  -> skipped because teardown == NULL
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 1]->teardown()
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE]

A failed online operation looks like this::

  [CPUHP_OFFLINE]
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 1]->startup()       -> success
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 2]->startup()       -> success
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 3]                  -> skipped because startup == NULL
  ...
  [CPUHP_BRINGUP_CPU]->startup()       -> success
  === End of PREPARE section
  [CPUHP_BRINGUP_CPU + 1]->startup()   -> success
  ...
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE]->startup()         -> success
  === End of STARTUP section
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE + 1]->startup()     -> success
  ---
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE + N]->startup()     -> fail
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE + (N - 1)]->teardown()
  ...
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE + 1]->teardown()
  === Start of STARTUP section
  [CPUHP_AP_ONLINE]->teardown()
  ...
  [CPUHP_BRINGUP_ONLINE - 1]->teardown()
  ...
  === Start of PREPARE section
  [CPUHP_BRINGUP_CPU]->teardown()
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 3]->teardown()
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 2]                  -> skipped because teardown == NULL
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE + 1]->teardown()
  [CPUHP_OFFLINE]

A failed offline operation looks like this::

  [CPUHP_ONLINE]
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - 1]->teardown()       -> success
  ...
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - N]->teardown()       -> fail
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - (N - 1)]->startup()
  ...
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - 1]->startup()
  [CPUHP_ONLINE]

Recursive failures cannot be handled sensibly. Look at the following
example of a recursive fail due to a failed offline operation: ::

  [CPUHP_ONLINE]
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - 1]->teardown()       -> success
  ...
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - N]->teardown()       -> fail
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - (N - 1)]->startup()  -> success
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - (N - 2)]->startup()  -> fail

The CPU hotplug state machine stops right here and does not try to go back
down again because that would likely result in an endless loop::

  [CPUHP_ONLINE - (N - 1)]->teardown() -> success
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - N]->teardown()       -> fail
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - (N - 1)]->startup()  -> success
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - (N - 2)]->startup()  -> fail
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - (N - 1)]->teardown() -> success
  [CPUHP_ONLINE - N]->teardown()       -> fail

Lather, rinse and repeat. In this case the CPU left in state::

  [CPUHP_ONLINE - (N - 1)]

which at least lets the system make progress and gives the user a chance to
debug or even resolve the situation.

Allocating a state
------------------

There are two ways to allocate a CPU hotplug state:

* Static allocation

  Static allocation has to be used when the subsystem or driver has
  ordering requirements versus other CPU hotplug states. E.g. the PERF core
  startup callback has to be invoked before the PERF driver startup
  callbacks during a CPU online operation. During a CPU offline operation
  the driver teardown callbacks have to be invoked before the core teardown
  callback. The statically allocated states are described by constants in
  the cpuhp_state enum which can be found in include/linux/cpuhotplug.h.

  Insert the state into the enum at the proper place so the ordering
  requirements are fulfilled. The state constant has to be used for state
  setup and removal.

  Static allocation is also required when the state callbacks are not set
  up at runtime and are part of the initializer of the CPU hotplug state
  array in kernel/cpu.c.

* Dynamic allocation

  When there are no ordering requirements for the state callbacks then
  dynamic allocation is the preferred method. The state number is allocated
  by the setup function and returned to the caller on success.

  Only the PREPARE and ONLINE sections provide a dynamic allocation
  range. The STARTING section does not as most of the callbacks in that
  section have explicit ordering requirements.

Setup of a CPU hotplug state
----------------------------

The core code provides the following functions to setup a state:

* cpuhp_setup_state(state, name, startup, teardown)
* cpuhp_setup_state_nocalls(state, name, startup, teardown)
* cpuhp_setup_state_cpuslocked(state, name, startup, teardown)
* cpuhp_setup_state_nocalls_cpuslocked(state, name, startup, teardown)

For cases where a driver or a subsystem has multiple instances and the same
CPU hotplug state callbacks need to be invoked for each instance, the CPU
hotplug core provides multi-instance support. The advantage over driver
specific instance lists is that the instance related functions are fully
serialized against CPU hotplug operations and provide the automatic
invocations of the state callbacks on add and removal. To set up such a
multi-instance state the following function is available:

* cpuhp_setup_state_multi(state, name, startup, teardown)

The @state argument is either a statically allocated state or one of the
constants for dynamically allocated states - CPUHP_BP_PREPARE_DYN,
CPUHP_AP_ONLINE_DYN - depending on the state section (PREPARE, ONLINE) for
which a dynamic state should be allocated.

The @name argument is used for sysfs output and for instrumentation. The
naming convention is "subsys:mode" or "subsys/driver:mode",
e.g. "perf:mode" or "perf/x86:mode". The common mode names are:

======== =======================================================
prepare  For states in the PREPARE section

dead     For states in the PREPARE section which do not provide
         a startup callback

starting For states in the STARTING section

dying    For states in the STARTING section which do not provide
         a startup callback

online   For states in the ONLINE section

offline  For states in the ONLINE section which do not provide
         a startup callback
======== =======================================================

As the @name argument is only used for sysfs and instrumentation other mode
descriptors can be used as well if they describe the nature of the state
better than the common ones.

Examples for @name arguments: "perf/online", "perf/x86:prepare",
"RCU/tree:dying", "sched/waitempty"

The @startup argument is a function pointer to the callback which should be
invoked during a CPU online operation. If the usage site does not require a
startup callback set the pointer to NULL.

The @teardown argument is a function pointer to the callback which should
be invoked during a CPU offline operation. If the usage site does not
require a teardown callback set the pointer to NULL.

The functions differ in the way how the installed callbacks are treated:

  * cpuhp_setup_state_nocalls(), cpuhp_setup_state_nocalls_cpuslocked()
    and cpuhp_setup_state_multi() only install the callbacks

  * cpuhp_setup_state() and cpuhp_setup_state_cpuslocked() install the
    callbacks and invoke the @startup callback (if not NULL) for all online
    CPUs which have currently a state greater than the newly installed
    state. Depending on the state section the callback is either invoked on
    the current CPU (PREPARE section) or on each online CPU (ONLINE
    section) in the context of the CPU's hotplug thread.

    If a callback fails for CPU N then the teardown callback for CPU
    0 .. N-1 is invoked to rollback the operation. The state setup fails,
    the callbacks for the state are not installed and in case of dynamic
    allocation the allocated state is freed.

The state setup and the callback invocations are serialized against CPU
hotplug operations. If the setup function has to be called from a CPU
hotplug read locked region, then the _cpuslocked() variants have to be
used. These functions cannot be used from within CPU hotplug callbacks.

The function return values:
  ======== ===================================================================
  0        Statically allocated state was successfully set up

  >0       Dynamically allocated state was successfully set up.

           The returned number is the state number which was allocated. If
           the state callbacks have to be removed later, e.g. module
           removal, then this number has to be saved by the caller and used
           as @state argument for the state remove function. For
           multi-instance states the dynamically allocated state number is
           also required as @state argument for the instance add/remove
           operations.

  <0	   Operation failed
  ======== ===================================================================

Removal of a CPU hotplug state
------------------------------

To remove a previously set up state, the following functions are provided:

* cpuhp_remove_state(state)
* cpuhp_remove_state_nocalls(state)
* cpuhp_remove_state_nocalls_cpuslocked(state)
* cpuhp_remove_multi_state(state)

The @state argument is either a statically allocated state or the state
number which was allocated in the dynamic range by cpuhp_setup_state*(). If
the state is in the dynamic range, then the state number is freed and
available for dynamic allocation again.

The functions differ in the way how the installed callbacks are treated:

  * cpuhp_remove_state_nocalls(), cpuhp_remove_state_nocalls_cpuslocked()
    and cpuhp_remove_multi_state() only remove the callbacks.

  * cpuhp_remove_state() removes the callbacks and invokes the teardown
    callback (if not NULL) for all online CPUs which have currently a state
    greater than the removed state. Depending on the state section the
    callback is either invoked on the current CPU (PREPARE section) or on
    each online CPU (ONLINE section) in the context of the CPU's hotplug
    thread.

    In order to complete the removal, the teardown callback should not fail.

The state removal and the callback invocations are serialized against CPU
hotplug operations. If the remove function has to be called from a CPU
hotplug read locked region, then the _cpuslocked() variants have to be
used. These functions cannot be used from within CPU hotplug callbacks.

If a multi-instance state is removed then the caller has to remove all
instances first.

Multi-Instance state instance management
----------------------------------------

Once the multi-instance state is set up, instances can be added to the
state:

  * cpuhp_state_add_instance(state, node)
  * cpuhp_state_add_instance_nocalls(state, node)

The @state argument is either a statically allocated state or the state
number which was allocated in the dynamic range by cpuhp_setup_state_multi().

The @node argument is a pointer to an hlist_node which is embedded in the
instance's data structure. The pointer is handed to the multi-instance
state callbacks and can be used by the callback to retrieve the instance
via container_of().

The functions differ in the way how the installed callbacks are treated:

  * cpuhp_state_add_instance_nocalls() and only adds the instance to the
    multi-instance state's node list.

  * cpuhp_state_add_instance() adds the instance and invokes the startup
    callback (if not NULL) associated with @state for all online CPUs which
    have currently a state greater than @state. The callback is only
    invoked for the to be added instance. Depending on the state section
    the callback is either invoked on the current CPU (PREPARE section) or
    on each online CPU (ONLINE section) in the context of the CPU's hotplug
    thread.

    If a callback fails for CPU N then the teardown callback for CPU
    0 .. N-1 is invoked to rollback the operation, the function fails and
    the instance is not added to the node list of the multi-instance state.

To remove an instance from the state's node list these functions are
available:

  * cpuhp_state_remove_instance(state, node)
  * cpuhp_state_remove_instance_nocalls(state, node)

The arguments are the same as for the cpuhp_state_add_instance*()
variants above.

The functions differ in the way how the installed callbacks are treated:

  * cpuhp_state_remove_instance_nocalls() only removes the instance from the
    state's node list.

  * cpuhp_state_remove_instance() removes the instance and invokes the
    teardown callback (if not NULL) associated with @state for all online
    CPUs which have currently a state greater than @state.  The callback is
    only invoked for the to be removed instance.  Depending on the state
    section the callback is either invoked on the current CPU (PREPARE
    section) or on each online CPU (ONLINE section) in the context of the
    CPU's hotplug thread.

    In order to complete the removal, the teardown callback should not fail.

The node list add/remove operations and the callback invocations are
serialized against CPU hotplug operations. These functions cannot be used
from within CPU hotplug callbacks and CPU hotplug read locked regions.

Examples
--------

Setup and teardown a statically allocated state in the STARTING section for
notifications on online and offline operations::

   ret = cpuhp_setup_state(CPUHP_SUBSYS_STARTING, "subsys:starting", subsys_cpu_starting, subsys_cpu_dying);
   if (ret < 0)
        return ret;
   ....
   cpuhp_remove_state(CPUHP_SUBSYS_STARTING);

Setup and teardown a dynamically allocated state in the ONLINE section
for notifications on offline operations::

   state = cpuhp_setup_state(CPUHP_AP_ONLINE_DYN, "subsys:offline", NULL, subsys_cpu_offline);
   if (state < 0)
       return state;
   ....
   cpuhp_remove_state(state);

Setup and teardown a dynamically allocated state in the ONLINE section
for notifications on online operations without invoking the callbacks::

   state = cpuhp_setup_state_nocalls(CPUHP_AP_ONLINE_DYN, "subsys:online", subsys_cpu_online, NULL);
   if (state < 0)
       return state;
   ....
   cpuhp_remove_state_nocalls(state);

Setup, use and teardown a dynamically allocated multi-instance state in the
ONLINE section for notifications on online and offline operation::

   state = cpuhp_setup_state_multi(CPUHP_AP_ONLINE_DYN, "subsys:online", subsys_cpu_online, subsys_cpu_offline);
   if (state < 0)
       return state;
   ....
   ret = cpuhp_state_add_instance(state, &inst1->node);
   if (ret)
        return ret;
   ....
   ret = cpuhp_state_add_instance(state, &inst2->node);
   if (ret)
        return ret;
   ....
   cpuhp_remove_instance(state, &inst1->node);
   ....
   cpuhp_remove_instance(state, &inst2->node);
   ....
   remove_multi_state(state);


Testing of hotplug states
=========================

One way to verify whether a custom state is working as expected or not is to
shutdown a CPU and then put it online again. It is also possible to put the CPU
to certain state (for instance *CPUHP_AP_ONLINE*) and then go back to
*CPUHP_ONLINE*. This would simulate an error one state after *CPUHP_AP_ONLINE*
which would lead to rollback to the online state.

All registered states are enumerated in ``/sys/devices/system/cpu/hotplug/states`` ::

 $ tail /sys/devices/system/cpu/hotplug/states
 138: mm/vmscan:online
 139: mm/vmstat:online
 140: lib/percpu_cnt:online
 141: acpi/cpu-drv:online
 142: base/cacheinfo:online
 143: virtio/net:online
 144: x86/mce:online
 145: printk:online
 168: sched:active
 169: online

To rollback CPU4 to ``lib/percpu_cnt:online`` and back online just issue::

  $ cat /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu4/hotplug/state
  169
  $ echo 140 > /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu4/hotplug/target
  $ cat /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu4/hotplug/state
  140

It is important to note that the teardown callback of state 140 have been
invoked. And now get back online::

  $ echo 169 > /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu4/hotplug/target
  $ cat /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpu4/hotplug/state
  169

With trace events enabled, the individual steps are visible, too::

  #  TASK-PID   CPU#    TIMESTAMP  FUNCTION
  #     | |       |        |         |
      bash-394  [001]  22.976: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 140 step: 169 (cpuhp_kick_ap_work)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  22.977: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 140 step: 168 (sched_cpu_deactivate)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  22.990: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 168 step: 168 ret: 0
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  22.991: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 140 step: 144 (mce_cpu_pre_down)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  22.992: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 144 step: 144 ret: 0
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  22.993: cpuhp_multi_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 140 step: 143 (virtnet_cpu_down_prep)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  22.994: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 143 step: 143 ret: 0
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  22.995: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 140 step: 142 (cacheinfo_cpu_pre_down)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  22.996: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 142 step: 142 ret: 0
      bash-394  [001]  22.997: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 140 step: 169 ret: 0
      bash-394  [005]  95.540: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 169 step: 140 (cpuhp_kick_ap_work)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.541: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 169 step: 141 (acpi_soft_cpu_online)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.542: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 141 step: 141 ret: 0
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.543: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 169 step: 142 (cacheinfo_cpu_online)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.544: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 142 step: 142 ret: 0
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.545: cpuhp_multi_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 169 step: 143 (virtnet_cpu_online)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.546: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 143 step: 143 ret: 0
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.547: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 169 step: 144 (mce_cpu_online)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.548: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 144 step: 144 ret: 0
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.549: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 169 step: 145 (console_cpu_notify)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.550: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 145 step: 145 ret: 0
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.551: cpuhp_enter: cpu: 0004 target: 169 step: 168 (sched_cpu_activate)
   cpuhp/4-31   [004]  95.552: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 168 step: 168 ret: 0
      bash-394  [005]  95.553: cpuhp_exit:  cpu: 0004  state: 169 step: 140 ret: 0

As it an be seen, CPU4 went down until timestamp 22.996 and then back up until
95.552. All invoked callbacks including their return codes are visible in the
trace.

Architecture's requirements
===========================

The following functions and configurations are required:

``CONFIG_HOTPLUG_CPU``
  This entry needs to be enabled in Kconfig

``__cpu_up()``
  Arch interface to bring up a CPU

``__cpu_disable()``
  Arch interface to shutdown a CPU, no more interrupts can be handled by the
  kernel after the routine returns. This includes the shutdown of the timer.

``__cpu_die()``
  This actually supposed to ensure death of the CPU. Actually look at some
  example code in other arch that implement CPU hotplug. The processor is taken
  down from the ``idle()`` loop for that specific architecture. ``__cpu_die()``
  typically waits for some per_cpu state to be set, to ensure the processor dead
  routine is called to be sure positively.

User Space Notification
=======================

After CPU successfully onlined or offline udev events are sent. A udev rule like::

  SUBSYSTEM=="cpu", DRIVERS=="processor", DEVPATH=="/devices/system/cpu/*", RUN+="the_hotplug_receiver.sh"

will receive all events. A script like::

  #!/bin/sh

  if [ "${ACTION}" = "offline" ]
  then
      echo "CPU ${DEVPATH##*/} offline"

  elif [ "${ACTION}" = "online" ]
  then
      echo "CPU ${DEVPATH##*/} online"

  fi

can process the event further.

When changes to the CPUs in the system occur, the sysfs file
/sys/devices/system/cpu/crash_hotplug contains '1' if the kernel
updates the kdump capture kernel list of CPUs itself (via elfcorehdr and
other relevant kexec segment), or '0' if userspace must update the kdump
capture kernel list of CPUs.

The availability depends on the CONFIG_HOTPLUG_CPU kernel configuration
option.

To skip userspace processing of CPU hot un/plug events for kdump
(i.e. the unload-then-reload to obtain a current list of CPUs), this sysfs
file can be used in a udev rule as follows:

 SUBSYSTEM=="cpu", ATTRS{crash_hotplug}=="1", GOTO="kdump_reload_end"

For a CPU hot un/plug event, if the architecture supports kernel updates
of the elfcorehdr (which contains the list of CPUs) and other relevant
kexec segments, then the rule skips the unload-then-reload of the kdump
capture kernel.

Kernel Inline Documentations Reference
======================================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/cpuhotplug.h
============================================
The object-lifetime debugging infrastructure
============================================

:Author: Thomas Gleixner

Introduction
============

debugobjects is a generic infrastructure to track the life time of
kernel objects and validate the operations on those.

debugobjects is useful to check for the following error patterns:

-  Activation of uninitialized objects

-  Initialization of active objects

-  Usage of freed/destroyed objects

debugobjects is not changing the data structure of the real object so it
can be compiled in with a minimal runtime impact and enabled on demand
with a kernel command line option.

Howto use debugobjects
======================

A kernel subsystem needs to provide a data structure which describes the
object type and add calls into the debug code at appropriate places. The
data structure to describe the object type needs at minimum the name of
the object type. Optional functions can and should be provided to fixup
detected problems so the kernel can continue to work and the debug
information can be retrieved from a live system instead of hard core
debugging with serial consoles and stack trace transcripts from the
monitor.

The debug calls provided by debugobjects are:

-  debug_object_init

-  debug_object_init_on_stack

-  debug_object_activate

-  debug_object_deactivate

-  debug_object_destroy

-  debug_object_free

-  debug_object_assert_init

Each of these functions takes the address of the real object and a
pointer to the object type specific debug description structure.

Each detected error is reported in the statistics and a limited number
of errors are printk'ed including a full stack trace.

The statistics are available via /sys/kernel/debug/debug_objects/stats.
They provide information about the number of warnings and the number of
successful fixups along with information about the usage of the internal
tracking objects and the state of the internal tracking objects pool.

Debug functions
===============

.. kernel-doc:: lib/debugobjects.c
   :functions: debug_object_init

This function is called whenever the initialization function of a real
object is called.

When the real object is already tracked by debugobjects it is checked,
whether the object can be initialized. Initializing is not allowed for
active and destroyed objects. When debugobjects detects an error, then
it calls the fixup_init function of the object type description
structure if provided by the caller. The fixup function can correct the
problem before the real initialization of the object happens. E.g. it
can deactivate an active object in order to prevent damage to the
subsystem.

When the real object is not yet tracked by debugobjects, debugobjects
allocates a tracker object for the real object and sets the tracker
object state to ODEBUG_STATE_INIT. It verifies that the object is not
on the callers stack. If it is on the callers stack then a limited
number of warnings including a full stack trace is printk'ed. The
calling code must use debug_object_init_on_stack() and remove the
object before leaving the function which allocated it. See next section.

.. kernel-doc:: lib/debugobjects.c
   :functions: debug_object_init_on_stack

This function is called whenever the initialization function of a real
object which resides on the stack is called.

When the real object is already tracked by debugobjects it is checked,
whether the object can be initialized. Initializing is not allowed for
active and destroyed objects. When debugobjects detects an error, then
it calls the fixup_init function of the object type description
structure if provided by the caller. The fixup function can correct the
problem before the real initialization of the object happens. E.g. it
can deactivate an active object in order to prevent damage to the
subsystem.

When the real object is not yet tracked by debugobjects debugobjects
allocates a tracker object for the real object and sets the tracker
object state to ODEBUG_STATE_INIT. It verifies that the object is on
the callers stack.

An object which is on the stack must be removed from the tracker by
calling debug_object_free() before the function which allocates the
object returns. Otherwise we keep track of stale objects.

.. kernel-doc:: lib/debugobjects.c
   :functions: debug_object_activate

This function is called whenever the activation function of a real
object is called.

When the real object is already tracked by debugobjects it is checked,
whether the object can be activated. Activating is not allowed for
active and destroyed objects. When debugobjects detects an error, then
it calls the fixup_activate function of the object type description
structure if provided by the caller. The fixup function can correct the
problem before the real activation of the object happens. E.g. it can
deactivate an active object in order to prevent damage to the subsystem.

When the real object is not yet tracked by debugobjects then the
fixup_activate function is called if available. This is necessary to
allow the legitimate activation of statically allocated and initialized
objects. The fixup function checks whether the object is valid and calls
the debug_objects_init() function to initialize the tracking of this
object.

When the activation is legitimate, then the state of the associated
tracker object is set to ODEBUG_STATE_ACTIVE.


.. kernel-doc:: lib/debugobjects.c
   :functions: debug_object_deactivate

This function is called whenever the deactivation function of a real
object is called.

When the real object is tracked by debugobjects it is checked, whether
the object can be deactivated. Deactivating is not allowed for untracked
or destroyed objects.

When the deactivation is legitimate, then the state of the associated
tracker object is set to ODEBUG_STATE_INACTIVE.

.. kernel-doc:: lib/debugobjects.c
   :functions: debug_object_destroy

This function is called to mark an object destroyed. This is useful to
prevent the usage of invalid objects, which are still available in
memory: either statically allocated objects or objects which are freed
later.

When the real object is tracked by debugobjects it is checked, whether
the object can be destroyed. Destruction is not allowed for active and
destroyed objects. When debugobjects detects an error, then it calls the
fixup_destroy function of the object type description structure if
provided by the caller. The fixup function can correct the problem
before the real destruction of the object happens. E.g. it can
deactivate an active object in order to prevent damage to the subsystem.

When the destruction is legitimate, then the state of the associated
tracker object is set to ODEBUG_STATE_DESTROYED.

.. kernel-doc:: lib/debugobjects.c
   :functions: debug_object_free

This function is called before an object is freed.

When the real object is tracked by debugobjects it is checked, whether
the object can be freed. Free is not allowed for active objects. When
debugobjects detects an error, then it calls the fixup_free function of
the object type description structure if provided by the caller. The
fixup function can correct the problem before the real free of the
object happens. E.g. it can deactivate an active object in order to
prevent damage to the subsystem.

Note that debug_object_free removes the object from the tracker. Later
usage of the object is detected by the other debug checks.


.. kernel-doc:: lib/debugobjects.c
   :functions: debug_object_assert_init

This function is called to assert that an object has been initialized.

When the real object is not tracked by debugobjects, it calls
fixup_assert_init of the object type description structure provided by
the caller, with the hardcoded object state ODEBUG_NOT_AVAILABLE. The
fixup function can correct the problem by calling debug_object_init
and other specific initializing functions.

When the real object is already tracked by debugobjects it is ignored.

Fixup functions
===============

Debug object type description structure
---------------------------------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/debugobjects.h
   :internal:

fixup_init
-----------

This function is called from the debug code whenever a problem in
debug_object_init is detected. The function takes the address of the
object and the state which is currently recorded in the tracker.

Called from debug_object_init when the object state is:

-  ODEBUG_STATE_ACTIVE

The function returns true when the fixup was successful, otherwise
false. The return value is used to update the statistics.

Note, that the function needs to call the debug_object_init() function
again, after the damage has been repaired in order to keep the state
consistent.

fixup_activate
---------------

This function is called from the debug code whenever a problem in
debug_object_activate is detected.

Called from debug_object_activate when the object state is:

-  ODEBUG_STATE_NOTAVAILABLE

-  ODEBUG_STATE_ACTIVE

The function returns true when the fixup was successful, otherwise
false. The return value is used to update the statistics.

Note that the function needs to call the debug_object_activate()
function again after the damage has been repaired in order to keep the
state consistent.

The activation of statically initialized objects is a special case. When
debug_object_activate() has no tracked object for this object address
then fixup_activate() is called with object state
ODEBUG_STATE_NOTAVAILABLE. The fixup function needs to check whether
this is a legitimate case of a statically initialized object or not. In
case it is it calls debug_object_init() and debug_object_activate()
to make the object known to the tracker and marked active. In this case
the function should return false because this is not a real fixup.

fixup_destroy
--------------

This function is called from the debug code whenever a problem in
debug_object_destroy is detected.

Called from debug_object_destroy when the object state is:

-  ODEBUG_STATE_ACTIVE

The function returns true when the fixup was successful, otherwise
false. The return value is used to update the statistics.

fixup_free
-----------

This function is called from the debug code whenever a problem in
debug_object_free is detected. Further it can be called from the debug
checks in kfree/vfree, when an active object is detected from the
debug_check_no_obj_freed() sanity checks.

Called from debug_object_free() or debug_check_no_obj_freed() when
the object state is:

-  ODEBUG_STATE_ACTIVE

The function returns true when the fixup was successful, otherwise
false. The return value is used to update the statistics.

fixup_assert_init
-------------------

This function is called from the debug code whenever a problem in
debug_object_assert_init is detected.

Called from debug_object_assert_init() with a hardcoded state
ODEBUG_STATE_NOTAVAILABLE when the object is not found in the debug
bucket.

The function returns true when the fixup was successful, otherwise
false. The return value is used to update the statistics.

Note, this function should make sure debug_object_init() is called
before returning.

The handling of statically initialized objects is a special case. The
fixup function should check if this is a legitimate case of a statically
initialized object or not. In this case only debug_object_init()
should be called to make the object known to the tracker. Then the
function should return false because this is not a real fixup.

Known Bugs And Assumptions
==========================

None (knock on wood).
===========================================================================
Using physical DMA provided by OHCI-1394 FireWire controllers for debugging
===========================================================================

Introduction
------------

Basically all FireWire controllers which are in use today are compliant
to the OHCI-1394 specification which defines the controller to be a PCI
bus master which uses DMA to offload data transfers from the CPU and has
a "Physical Response Unit" which executes specific requests by employing
PCI-Bus master DMA after applying filters defined by the OHCI-1394 driver.

Once properly configured, remote machines can send these requests to
ask the OHCI-1394 controller to perform read and write requests on
physical system memory and, for read requests, send the result of
the physical memory read back to the requester.

With that, it is possible to debug issues by reading interesting memory
locations such as buffers like the printk buffer or the process table.

Retrieving a full system memory dump is also possible over the FireWire,
using data transfer rates in the order of 10MB/s or more.

With most FireWire controllers, memory access is limited to the low 4 GB
of physical address space.  This can be a problem on machines where memory is
located mostly above that limit, but it is rarely a problem on more common
hardware such as x86, x86-64 and PowerPC.

At least LSI FW643e and FW643e2 controllers are known to support access to
physical addresses above 4 GB, but this feature is currently not enabled by
Linux.

Together with a early initialization of the OHCI-1394 controller for debugging,
this facility proved most useful for examining long debugs logs in the printk
buffer on to debug early boot problems in areas like ACPI where the system
fails to boot and other means for debugging (serial port) are either not
available (notebooks) or too slow for extensive debug information (like ACPI).

Drivers
-------

The firewire-ohci driver in drivers/firewire uses filtered physical
DMA by default, which is more secure but not suitable for remote debugging.
Pass the remote_dma=1 parameter to the driver to get unfiltered physical DMA.

Because the firewire-ohci driver depends on the PCI enumeration to be
completed, an initialization routine which runs pretty early has been
implemented for x86.  This routine runs long before console_init() can be
called, i.e. before the printk buffer appears on the console.

To activate it, enable CONFIG_PROVIDE_OHCI1394_DMA_INIT (Kernel hacking menu:
Remote debugging over FireWire early on boot) and pass the parameter
"ohci1394_dma=early" to the recompiled kernel on boot.

Tools
-----

firescope - Originally developed by Benjamin Herrenschmidt, Andi Kleen ported
it from PowerPC to x86 and x86_64 and added functionality, firescope can now
be used to view the printk buffer of a remote machine, even with live update.

Bernhard Kaindl enhanced firescope to support accessing 64-bit machines
from 32-bit firescope and vice versa:
- http://v3.sk/~lkundrak/firescope/

and he implemented fast system dump (alpha version - read README.txt):
- http://halobates.de/firewire/firedump-0.1.tar.bz2

There is also a gdb proxy for firewire which allows to use gdb to access
data which can be referenced from symbols found by gdb in vmlinux:
- http://halobates.de/firewire/fireproxy-0.33.tar.bz2

The latest version of this gdb proxy (fireproxy-0.34) can communicate (not
yet stable) with kgdb over an memory-based communication module (kgdbom).

Getting Started
---------------

The OHCI-1394 specification regulates that the OHCI-1394 controller must
disable all physical DMA on each bus reset.

This means that if you want to debug an issue in a system state where
interrupts are disabled and where no polling of the OHCI-1394 controller
for bus resets takes place, you have to establish any FireWire cable
connections and fully initialize all FireWire hardware __before__ the
system enters such state.

Step-by-step instructions for using firescope with early OHCI initialization:

1) Verify that your hardware is supported:

   Load the firewire-ohci module and check your kernel logs.
   You should see a line similar to::

     firewire_ohci 0000:15:00.1: added OHCI v1.0 device as card 2, 4 IR + 4 IT
     ... contexts, quirks 0x11

   when loading the driver. If you have no supported controller, many PCI,
   CardBus and even some Express cards which are fully compliant to OHCI-1394
   specification are available. If it requires no driver for Windows operating
   systems, it most likely is. Only specialized shops have cards which are not
   compliant, they are based on TI PCILynx chips and require drivers for Windows
   operating systems.

   The mentioned kernel log message contains the string "physUB" if the
   controller implements a writable Physical Upper Bound register.  This is
   required for physical DMA above 4 GB (but not utilized by Linux yet).

2) Establish a working FireWire cable connection:

   Any FireWire cable, as long at it provides electrically and mechanically
   stable connection and has matching connectors (there are small 4-pin and
   large 6-pin FireWire ports) will do.

   If an driver is running on both machines you should see a line like::

     firewire_core 0000:15:00.1: created device fw1: GUID 00061b0020105917, S400

   on both machines in the kernel log when the cable is plugged in
   and connects the two machines.

3) Test physical DMA using firescope:

   On the debug host, make sure that /dev/fw* is accessible,
   then start firescope::

	$ firescope
	Port 0 (/dev/fw1) opened, 2 nodes detected

	FireScope
	---------
	Target : <unspecified>
	Gen    : 1
	[Ctrl-T] choose target
	[Ctrl-H] this menu
	[Ctrl-Q] quit

    ------> Press Ctrl-T now, the output should be similar to:

	2 nodes available, local node is: 0
	 0: ffc0, uuid: 00000000 00000000 [LOCAL]
	 1: ffc1, uuid: 00279000 ba4bb801

   Besides the [LOCAL] node, it must show another node without error message.

4) Prepare for debugging with early OHCI-1394 initialization:

   4.1) Kernel compilation and installation on debug target

   Compile the kernel to be debugged with CONFIG_PROVIDE_OHCI1394_DMA_INIT
   (Kernel hacking: Provide code for enabling DMA over FireWire early on boot)
   enabled and install it on the machine to be debugged (debug target).

   4.2) Transfer the System.map of the debugged kernel to the debug host

   Copy the System.map of the kernel be debugged to the debug host (the host
   which is connected to the debugged machine over the FireWire cable).

5) Retrieving the printk buffer contents:

   With the FireWire cable connected, the OHCI-1394 driver on the debugging
   host loaded, reboot the debugged machine, booting the kernel which has
   CONFIG_PROVIDE_OHCI1394_DMA_INIT enabled, with the option ohci1394_dma=early.

   Then, on the debugging host, run firescope, for example by using -A::

	firescope -A System.map-of-debug-target-kernel

   Note: -A automatically attaches to the first non-local node. It only works
   reliably if only connected two machines are connected using FireWire.

   After having attached to the debug target, press Ctrl-D to view the
   complete printk buffer or Ctrl-U to enter auto update mode and get an
   updated live view of recent kernel messages logged on the debug target.

   Call "firescope -h" to get more information on firescope's options.

Notes
-----

Documentation and specifications: http://halobates.de/firewire/

FireWire is a trademark of Apple Inc. - for more information please refer to:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FireWire
=========================
Dynamic DMA mapping Guide
=========================

:Author: David S. Miller <davem@redhat.com>
:Author: Richard Henderson <rth@cygnus.com>
:Author: Jakub Jelinek <jakub@redhat.com>

This is a guide to device driver writers on how to use the DMA API
with example pseudo-code.  For a concise description of the API, see
Documentation/core-api/dma-api.rst.

CPU and DMA addresses
=====================

There are several kinds of addresses involved in the DMA API, and it's
important to understand the differences.

The kernel normally uses virtual addresses.  Any address returned by
kmalloc(), vmalloc(), and similar interfaces is a virtual address and can
be stored in a ``void *``.

The virtual memory system (TLB, page tables, etc.) translates virtual
addresses to CPU physical addresses, which are stored as "phys_addr_t" or
"resource_size_t".  The kernel manages device resources like registers as
physical addresses.  These are the addresses in /proc/iomem.  The physical
address is not directly useful to a driver; it must use ioremap() to map
the space and produce a virtual address.

I/O devices use a third kind of address: a "bus address".  If a device has
registers at an MMIO address, or if it performs DMA to read or write system
memory, the addresses used by the device are bus addresses.  In some
systems, bus addresses are identical to CPU physical addresses, but in
general they are not.  IOMMUs and host bridges can produce arbitrary
mappings between physical and bus addresses.

From a device's point of view, DMA uses the bus address space, but it may
be restricted to a subset of that space.  For example, even if a system
supports 64-bit addresses for main memory and PCI BARs, it may use an IOMMU
so devices only need to use 32-bit DMA addresses.

Here's a picture and some examples::

               CPU                  CPU                  Bus
             Virtual              Physical             Address
             Address              Address               Space
              Space                Space

            +-------+             +------+             +------+
            |       |             |MMIO  |   Offset    |      |
            |       |  Virtual    |Space |   applied   |      |
          C +-------+ --------> B +------+ ----------> +------+ A
            |       |  mapping    |      |   by host   |      |
  +-----+   |       |             |      |   bridge    |      |   +--------+
  |     |   |       |             +------+             |      |   |        |
  | CPU |   |       |             | RAM  |             |      |   | Device |
  |     |   |       |             |      |             |      |   |        |
  +-----+   +-------+             +------+             +------+   +--------+
            |       |  Virtual    |Buffer|   Mapping   |      |
          X +-------+ --------> Y +------+ <---------- +------+ Z
            |       |  mapping    | RAM  |   by IOMMU
            |       |             |      |
            |       |             |      |
            +-------+             +------+

During the enumeration process, the kernel learns about I/O devices and
their MMIO space and the host bridges that connect them to the system.  For
example, if a PCI device has a BAR, the kernel reads the bus address (A)
from the BAR and converts it to a CPU physical address (B).  The address B
is stored in a struct resource and usually exposed via /proc/iomem.  When a
driver claims a device, it typically uses ioremap() to map physical address
B at a virtual address (C).  It can then use, e.g., ioread32(C), to access
the device registers at bus address A.

If the device supports DMA, the driver sets up a buffer using kmalloc() or
a similar interface, which returns a virtual address (X).  The virtual
memory system maps X to a physical address (Y) in system RAM.  The driver
can use virtual address X to access the buffer, but the device itself
cannot because DMA doesn't go through the CPU virtual memory system.

In some simple systems, the device can do DMA directly to physical address
Y.  But in many others, there is IOMMU hardware that translates DMA
addresses to physical addresses, e.g., it translates Z to Y.  This is part
of the reason for the DMA API: the driver can give a virtual address X to
an interface like dma_map_single(), which sets up any required IOMMU
mapping and returns the DMA address Z.  The driver then tells the device to
do DMA to Z, and the IOMMU maps it to the buffer at address Y in system
RAM.

So that Linux can use the dynamic DMA mapping, it needs some help from the
drivers, namely it has to take into account that DMA addresses should be
mapped only for the time they are actually used and unmapped after the DMA
transfer.

The following API will work of course even on platforms where no such
hardware exists.

Note that the DMA API works with any bus independent of the underlying
microprocessor architecture. You should use the DMA API rather than the
bus-specific DMA API, i.e., use the dma_map_*() interfaces rather than the
pci_map_*() interfaces.

First of all, you should make sure::

	#include <linux/dma-mapping.h>

is in your driver, which provides the definition of dma_addr_t.  This type
can hold any valid DMA address for the platform and should be used
everywhere you hold a DMA address returned from the DMA mapping functions.

What memory is DMA'able?
========================

The first piece of information you must know is what kernel memory can
be used with the DMA mapping facilities.  There has been an unwritten
set of rules regarding this, and this text is an attempt to finally
write them down.

If you acquired your memory via the page allocator
(i.e. __get_free_page*()) or the generic memory allocators
(i.e. kmalloc() or kmem_cache_alloc()) then you may DMA to/from
that memory using the addresses returned from those routines.

This means specifically that you may _not_ use the memory/addresses
returned from vmalloc() for DMA.  It is possible to DMA to the
_underlying_ memory mapped into a vmalloc() area, but this requires
walking page tables to get the physical addresses, and then
translating each of those pages back to a kernel address using
something like __va().  [ EDIT: Update this when we integrate
Gerd Knorr's generic code which does this. ]

This rule also means that you may use neither kernel image addresses
(items in data/text/bss segments), nor module image addresses, nor
stack addresses for DMA.  These could all be mapped somewhere entirely
different than the rest of physical memory.  Even if those classes of
memory could physically work with DMA, you'd need to ensure the I/O
buffers were cacheline-aligned.  Without that, you'd see cacheline
sharing problems (data corruption) on CPUs with DMA-incoherent caches.
(The CPU could write to one word, DMA would write to a different one
in the same cache line, and one of them could be overwritten.)

Also, this means that you cannot take the return of a kmap()
call and DMA to/from that.  This is similar to vmalloc().

What about block I/O and networking buffers?  The block I/O and
networking subsystems make sure that the buffers they use are valid
for you to DMA from/to.

DMA addressing capabilities
===========================

By default, the kernel assumes that your device can address 32-bits of DMA
addressing.  For a 64-bit capable device, this needs to be increased, and for
a device with limitations, it needs to be decreased.

Special note about PCI: PCI-X specification requires PCI-X devices to support
64-bit addressing (DAC) for all transactions.  And at least one platform (SGI
SN2) requires 64-bit consistent allocations to operate correctly when the IO
bus is in PCI-X mode.

For correct operation, you must set the DMA mask to inform the kernel about
your devices DMA addressing capabilities.

This is performed via a call to dma_set_mask_and_coherent()::

	int dma_set_mask_and_coherent(struct device *dev, u64 mask);

which will set the mask for both streaming and coherent APIs together.  If you
have some special requirements, then the following two separate calls can be
used instead:

	The setup for streaming mappings is performed via a call to
	dma_set_mask()::

		int dma_set_mask(struct device *dev, u64 mask);

	The setup for consistent allocations is performed via a call
	to dma_set_coherent_mask()::

		int dma_set_coherent_mask(struct device *dev, u64 mask);

Here, dev is a pointer to the device struct of your device, and mask is a bit
mask describing which bits of an address your device supports.  Often the
device struct of your device is embedded in the bus-specific device struct of
your device.  For example, &pdev->dev is a pointer to the device struct of a
PCI device (pdev is a pointer to the PCI device struct of your device).

These calls usually return zero to indicate your device can perform DMA
properly on the machine given the address mask you provided, but they might
return an error if the mask is too small to be supportable on the given
system.  If it returns non-zero, your device cannot perform DMA properly on
this platform, and attempting to do so will result in undefined behavior.
You must not use DMA on this device unless the dma_set_mask family of
functions has returned success.

This means that in the failure case, you have two options:

1) Use some non-DMA mode for data transfer, if possible.
2) Ignore this device and do not initialize it.

It is recommended that your driver print a kernel KERN_WARNING message when
setting the DMA mask fails.  In this manner, if a user of your driver reports
that performance is bad or that the device is not even detected, you can ask
them for the kernel messages to find out exactly why.

The 24-bit addressing device would do something like this::

	if (dma_set_mask_and_coherent(dev, DMA_BIT_MASK(24))) {
		dev_warn(dev, "mydev: No suitable DMA available\n");
		goto ignore_this_device;
	}

The standard 64-bit addressing device would do something like this::

	dma_set_mask_and_coherent(dev, DMA_BIT_MASK(64))

dma_set_mask_and_coherent() never return fail when DMA_BIT_MASK(64). Typical
error code like::

	/* Wrong code */
	if (dma_set_mask_and_coherent(dev, DMA_BIT_MASK(64)))
		dma_set_mask_and_coherent(dev, DMA_BIT_MASK(32))

dma_set_mask_and_coherent() will never return failure when bigger than 32.
So typical code like::

	/* Recommended code */
	if (support_64bit)
		dma_set_mask_and_coherent(dev, DMA_BIT_MASK(64));
	else
		dma_set_mask_and_coherent(dev, DMA_BIT_MASK(32));

If the device only supports 32-bit addressing for descriptors in the
coherent allocations, but supports full 64-bits for streaming mappings
it would look like this::

	if (dma_set_mask(dev, DMA_BIT_MASK(64))) {
		dev_warn(dev, "mydev: No suitable DMA available\n");
		goto ignore_this_device;
	}

The coherent mask will always be able to set the same or a smaller mask as
the streaming mask. However for the rare case that a device driver only
uses consistent allocations, one would have to check the return value from
dma_set_coherent_mask().

Finally, if your device can only drive the low 24-bits of
address you might do something like::

	if (dma_set_mask(dev, DMA_BIT_MASK(24))) {
		dev_warn(dev, "mydev: 24-bit DMA addressing not available\n");
		goto ignore_this_device;
	}

When dma_set_mask() or dma_set_mask_and_coherent() is successful, and
returns zero, the kernel saves away this mask you have provided.  The
kernel will use this information later when you make DMA mappings.

There is a case which we are aware of at this time, which is worth
mentioning in this documentation.  If your device supports multiple
functions (for example a sound card provides playback and record
functions) and the various different functions have _different_
DMA addressing limitations, you may wish to probe each mask and
only provide the functionality which the machine can handle.  It
is important that the last call to dma_set_mask() be for the
most specific mask.

Here is pseudo-code showing how this might be done::

	#define PLAYBACK_ADDRESS_BITS	DMA_BIT_MASK(32)
	#define RECORD_ADDRESS_BITS	DMA_BIT_MASK(24)

	struct my_sound_card *card;
	struct device *dev;

	...
	if (!dma_set_mask(dev, PLAYBACK_ADDRESS_BITS)) {
		card->playback_enabled = 1;
	} else {
		card->playback_enabled = 0;
		dev_warn(dev, "%s: Playback disabled due to DMA limitations\n",
		       card->name);
	}
	if (!dma_set_mask(dev, RECORD_ADDRESS_BITS)) {
		card->record_enabled = 1;
	} else {
		card->record_enabled = 0;
		dev_warn(dev, "%s: Record disabled due to DMA limitations\n",
		       card->name);
	}

A sound card was used as an example here because this genre of PCI
devices seems to be littered with ISA chips given a PCI front end,
and thus retaining the 16MB DMA addressing limitations of ISA.

Types of DMA mappings
=====================

There are two types of DMA mappings:

- Consistent DMA mappings which are usually mapped at driver
  initialization, unmapped at the end and for which the hardware should
  guarantee that the device and the CPU can access the data
  in parallel and will see updates made by each other without any
  explicit software flushing.

  Think of "consistent" as "synchronous" or "coherent".

  The current default is to return consistent memory in the low 32
  bits of the DMA space.  However, for future compatibility you should
  set the consistent mask even if this default is fine for your
  driver.

  Good examples of what to use consistent mappings for are:

	- Network card DMA ring descriptors.
	- SCSI adapter mailbox command data structures.
	- Device firmware microcode executed out of
	  main memory.

  The invariant these examples all require is that any CPU store
  to memory is immediately visible to the device, and vice
  versa.  Consistent mappings guarantee this.

  .. important::

	     Consistent DMA memory does not preclude the usage of
	     proper memory barriers.  The CPU may reorder stores to
	     consistent memory just as it may normal memory.  Example:
	     if it is important for the device to see the first word
	     of a descriptor updated before the second, you must do
	     something like::

		desc->word0 = address;
		wmb();
		desc->word1 = DESC_VALID;

             in order to get correct behavior on all platforms.

	     Also, on some platforms your driver may need to flush CPU write
	     buffers in much the same way as it needs to flush write buffers
	     found in PCI bridges (such as by reading a register's value
	     after writing it).

- Streaming DMA mappings which are usually mapped for one DMA
  transfer, unmapped right after it (unless you use dma_sync_* below)
  and for which hardware can optimize for sequential accesses.

  Think of "streaming" as "asynchronous" or "outside the coherency
  domain".

  Good examples of what to use streaming mappings for are:

	- Networking buffers transmitted/received by a device.
	- Filesystem buffers written/read by a SCSI device.

  The interfaces for using this type of mapping were designed in
  such a way that an implementation can make whatever performance
  optimizations the hardware allows.  To this end, when using
  such mappings you must be explicit about what you want to happen.

Neither type of DMA mapping has alignment restrictions that come from
the underlying bus, although some devices may have such restrictions.
Also, systems with caches that aren't DMA-coherent will work better
when the underlying buffers don't share cache lines with other data.


Using Consistent DMA mappings
=============================

To allocate and map large (PAGE_SIZE or so) consistent DMA regions,
you should do::

	dma_addr_t dma_handle;

	cpu_addr = dma_alloc_coherent(dev, size, &dma_handle, gfp);

where device is a ``struct device *``. This may be called in interrupt
context with the GFP_ATOMIC flag.

Size is the length of the region you want to allocate, in bytes.

This routine will allocate RAM for that region, so it acts similarly to
__get_free_pages() (but takes size instead of a page order).  If your
driver needs regions sized smaller than a page, you may prefer using
the dma_pool interface, described below.

The consistent DMA mapping interfaces, will by default return a DMA address
which is 32-bit addressable.  Even if the device indicates (via the DMA mask)
that it may address the upper 32-bits, consistent allocation will only
return > 32-bit addresses for DMA if the consistent DMA mask has been
explicitly changed via dma_set_coherent_mask().  This is true of the
dma_pool interface as well.

dma_alloc_coherent() returns two values: the virtual address which you
can use to access it from the CPU and dma_handle which you pass to the
card.

The CPU virtual address and the DMA address are both
guaranteed to be aligned to the smallest PAGE_SIZE order which
is greater than or equal to the requested size.  This invariant
exists (for example) to guarantee that if you allocate a chunk
which is smaller than or equal to 64 kilobytes, the extent of the
buffer you receive will not cross a 64K boundary.

To unmap and free such a DMA region, you call::

	dma_free_coherent(dev, size, cpu_addr, dma_handle);

where dev, size are the same as in the above call and cpu_addr and
dma_handle are the values dma_alloc_coherent() returned to you.
This function may not be called in interrupt context.

If your driver needs lots of smaller memory regions, you can write
custom code to subdivide pages returned by dma_alloc_coherent(),
or you can use the dma_pool API to do that.  A dma_pool is like
a kmem_cache, but it uses dma_alloc_coherent(), not __get_free_pages().
Also, it understands common hardware constraints for alignment,
like queue heads needing to be aligned on N byte boundaries.

Create a dma_pool like this::

	struct dma_pool *pool;

	pool = dma_pool_create(name, dev, size, align, boundary);

The "name" is for diagnostics (like a kmem_cache name); dev and size
are as above.  The device's hardware alignment requirement for this
type of data is "align" (which is expressed in bytes, and must be a
power of two).  If your device has no boundary crossing restrictions,
pass 0 for boundary; passing 4096 says memory allocated from this pool
must not cross 4KByte boundaries (but at that time it may be better to
use dma_alloc_coherent() directly instead).

Allocate memory from a DMA pool like this::

	cpu_addr = dma_pool_alloc(pool, flags, &dma_handle);

flags are GFP_KERNEL if blocking is permitted (not in_interrupt nor
holding SMP locks), GFP_ATOMIC otherwise.  Like dma_alloc_coherent(),
this returns two values, cpu_addr and dma_handle.

Free memory that was allocated from a dma_pool like this::

	dma_pool_free(pool, cpu_addr, dma_handle);

where pool is what you passed to dma_pool_alloc(), and cpu_addr and
dma_handle are the values dma_pool_alloc() returned. This function
may be called in interrupt context.

Destroy a dma_pool by calling::

	dma_pool_destroy(pool);

Make sure you've called dma_pool_free() for all memory allocated
from a pool before you destroy the pool. This function may not
be called in interrupt context.

DMA Direction
=============

The interfaces described in subsequent portions of this document
take a DMA direction argument, which is an integer and takes on
one of the following values::

 DMA_BIDIRECTIONAL
 DMA_TO_DEVICE
 DMA_FROM_DEVICE
 DMA_NONE

You should provide the exact DMA direction if you know it.

DMA_TO_DEVICE means "from main memory to the device"
DMA_FROM_DEVICE means "from the device to main memory"
It is the direction in which the data moves during the DMA
transfer.

You are _strongly_ encouraged to specify this as precisely
as you possibly can.

If you absolutely cannot know the direction of the DMA transfer,
specify DMA_BIDIRECTIONAL.  It means that the DMA can go in
either direction.  The platform guarantees that you may legally
specify this, and that it will work, but this may be at the
cost of performance for example.

The value DMA_NONE is to be used for debugging.  One can
hold this in a data structure before you come to know the
precise direction, and this will help catch cases where your
direction tracking logic has failed to set things up properly.

Another advantage of specifying this value precisely (outside of
potential platform-specific optimizations of such) is for debugging.
Some platforms actually have a write permission boolean which DMA
mappings can be marked with, much like page protections in the user
program address space.  Such platforms can and do report errors in the
kernel logs when the DMA controller hardware detects violation of the
permission setting.

Only streaming mappings specify a direction, consistent mappings
implicitly have a direction attribute setting of
DMA_BIDIRECTIONAL.

The SCSI subsystem tells you the direction to use in the
'sc_data_direction' member of the SCSI command your driver is
working on.

For Networking drivers, it's a rather simple affair.  For transmit
packets, map/unmap them with the DMA_TO_DEVICE direction
specifier.  For receive packets, just the opposite, map/unmap them
with the DMA_FROM_DEVICE direction specifier.

Using Streaming DMA mappings
============================

The streaming DMA mapping routines can be called from interrupt
context.  There are two versions of each map/unmap, one which will
map/unmap a single memory region, and one which will map/unmap a
scatterlist.

To map a single region, you do::

	struct device *dev = &my_dev->dev;
	dma_addr_t dma_handle;
	void *addr = buffer->ptr;
	size_t size = buffer->len;

	dma_handle = dma_map_single(dev, addr, size, direction);
	if (dma_mapping_error(dev, dma_handle)) {
		/*
		 * reduce current DMA mapping usage,
		 * delay and try again later or
		 * reset driver.
		 */
		goto map_error_handling;
	}

and to unmap it::

	dma_unmap_single(dev, dma_handle, size, direction);

You should call dma_mapping_error() as dma_map_single() could fail and return
error.  Doing so will ensure that the mapping code will work correctly on all
DMA implementations without any dependency on the specifics of the underlying
implementation. Using the returned address without checking for errors could
result in failures ranging from panics to silent data corruption.  The same
applies to dma_map_page() as well.

You should call dma_unmap_single() when the DMA activity is finished, e.g.,
from the interrupt which told you that the DMA transfer is done.

Using CPU pointers like this for single mappings has a disadvantage:
you cannot reference HIGHMEM memory in this way.  Thus, there is a
map/unmap interface pair akin to dma_{map,unmap}_single().  These
interfaces deal with page/offset pairs instead of CPU pointers.
Specifically::

	struct device *dev = &my_dev->dev;
	dma_addr_t dma_handle;
	struct page *page = buffer->page;
	unsigned long offset = buffer->offset;
	size_t size = buffer->len;

	dma_handle = dma_map_page(dev, page, offset, size, direction);
	if (dma_mapping_error(dev, dma_handle)) {
		/*
		 * reduce current DMA mapping usage,
		 * delay and try again later or
		 * reset driver.
		 */
		goto map_error_handling;
	}

	...

	dma_unmap_page(dev, dma_handle, size, direction);

Here, "offset" means byte offset within the given page.

You should call dma_mapping_error() as dma_map_page() could fail and return
error as outlined under the dma_map_single() discussion.

You should call dma_unmap_page() when the DMA activity is finished, e.g.,
from the interrupt which told you that the DMA transfer is done.

With scatterlists, you map a region gathered from several regions by::

	int i, count = dma_map_sg(dev, sglist, nents, direction);
	struct scatterlist *sg;

	for_each_sg(sglist, sg, count, i) {
		hw_address[i] = sg_dma_address(sg);
		hw_len[i] = sg_dma_len(sg);
	}

where nents is the number of entries in the sglist.

The implementation is free to merge several consecutive sglist entries
into one (e.g. if DMA mapping is done with PAGE_SIZE granularity, any
consecutive sglist entries can be merged into one provided the first one
ends and the second one starts on a page boundary - in fact this is a huge
advantage for cards which either cannot do scatter-gather or have very
limited number of scatter-gather entries) and returns the actual number
of sg entries it mapped them to. On failure 0 is returned.

Then you should loop count times (note: this can be less than nents times)
and use sg_dma_address() and sg_dma_len() macros where you previously
accessed sg->address and sg->length as shown above.

To unmap a scatterlist, just call::

	dma_unmap_sg(dev, sglist, nents, direction);

Again, make sure DMA activity has already finished.

.. note::

	The 'nents' argument to the dma_unmap_sg call must be
	the _same_ one you passed into the dma_map_sg call,
	it should _NOT_ be the 'count' value _returned_ from the
	dma_map_sg call.

Every dma_map_{single,sg}() call should have its dma_unmap_{single,sg}()
counterpart, because the DMA address space is a shared resource and
you could render the machine unusable by consuming all DMA addresses.

If you need to use the same streaming DMA region multiple times and touch
the data in between the DMA transfers, the buffer needs to be synced
properly in order for the CPU and device to see the most up-to-date and
correct copy of the DMA buffer.

So, firstly, just map it with dma_map_{single,sg}(), and after each DMA
transfer call either::

	dma_sync_single_for_cpu(dev, dma_handle, size, direction);

or::

	dma_sync_sg_for_cpu(dev, sglist, nents, direction);

as appropriate.

Then, if you wish to let the device get at the DMA area again,
finish accessing the data with the CPU, and then before actually
giving the buffer to the hardware call either::

	dma_sync_single_for_device(dev, dma_handle, size, direction);

or::

	dma_sync_sg_for_device(dev, sglist, nents, direction);

as appropriate.

.. note::

	      The 'nents' argument to dma_sync_sg_for_cpu() and
	      dma_sync_sg_for_device() must be the same passed to
	      dma_map_sg(). It is _NOT_ the count returned by
	      dma_map_sg().

After the last DMA transfer call one of the DMA unmap routines
dma_unmap_{single,sg}(). If you don't touch the data from the first
dma_map_*() call till dma_unmap_*(), then you don't have to call the
dma_sync_*() routines at all.

Here is pseudo code which shows a situation in which you would need
to use the dma_sync_*() interfaces::

	my_card_setup_receive_buffer(struct my_card *cp, char *buffer, int len)
	{
		dma_addr_t mapping;

		mapping = dma_map_single(cp->dev, buffer, len, DMA_FROM_DEVICE);
		if (dma_mapping_error(cp->dev, mapping)) {
			/*
			 * reduce current DMA mapping usage,
			 * delay and try again later or
			 * reset driver.
			 */
			goto map_error_handling;
		}

		cp->rx_buf = buffer;
		cp->rx_len = len;
		cp->rx_dma = mapping;

		give_rx_buf_to_card(cp);
	}

	...

	my_card_interrupt_handler(int irq, void *devid, struct pt_regs *regs)
	{
		struct my_card *cp = devid;

		...
		if (read_card_status(cp) == RX_BUF_TRANSFERRED) {
			struct my_card_header *hp;

			/* Examine the header to see if we wish
			 * to accept the data.  But synchronize
			 * the DMA transfer with the CPU first
			 * so that we see updated contents.
			 */
			dma_sync_single_for_cpu(&cp->dev, cp->rx_dma,
						cp->rx_len,
						DMA_FROM_DEVICE);

			/* Now it is safe to examine the buffer. */
			hp = (struct my_card_header *) cp->rx_buf;
			if (header_is_ok(hp)) {
				dma_unmap_single(&cp->dev, cp->rx_dma, cp->rx_len,
						 DMA_FROM_DEVICE);
				pass_to_upper_layers(cp->rx_buf);
				make_and_setup_new_rx_buf(cp);
			} else {
				/* CPU should not write to
				 * DMA_FROM_DEVICE-mapped area,
				 * so dma_sync_single_for_device() is
				 * not needed here. It would be required
				 * for DMA_BIDIRECTIONAL mapping if
				 * the memory was modified.
				 */
				give_rx_buf_to_card(cp);
			}
		}
	}

Handling Errors
===============

DMA address space is limited on some architectures and an allocation
failure can be determined by:

- checking if dma_alloc_coherent() returns NULL or dma_map_sg returns 0

- checking the dma_addr_t returned from dma_map_single() and dma_map_page()
  by using dma_mapping_error()::

	dma_addr_t dma_handle;

	dma_handle = dma_map_single(dev, addr, size, direction);
	if (dma_mapping_error(dev, dma_handle)) {
		/*
		 * reduce current DMA mapping usage,
		 * delay and try again later or
		 * reset driver.
		 */
		goto map_error_handling;
	}

- unmap pages that are already mapped, when mapping error occurs in the middle
  of a multiple page mapping attempt. These example are applicable to
  dma_map_page() as well.

Example 1::

	dma_addr_t dma_handle1;
	dma_addr_t dma_handle2;

	dma_handle1 = dma_map_single(dev, addr, size, direction);
	if (dma_mapping_error(dev, dma_handle1)) {
		/*
		 * reduce current DMA mapping usage,
		 * delay and try again later or
		 * reset driver.
		 */
		goto map_error_handling1;
	}
	dma_handle2 = dma_map_single(dev, addr, size, direction);
	if (dma_mapping_error(dev, dma_handle2)) {
		/*
		 * reduce current DMA mapping usage,
		 * delay and try again later or
		 * reset driver.
		 */
		goto map_error_handling2;
	}

	...

	map_error_handling2:
		dma_unmap_single(dma_handle1);
	map_error_handling1:

Example 2::

	/*
	 * if buffers are allocated in a loop, unmap all mapped buffers when
	 * mapping error is detected in the middle
	 */

	dma_addr_t dma_addr;
	dma_addr_t array[DMA_BUFFERS];
	int save_index = 0;

	for (i = 0; i < DMA_BUFFERS; i++) {

		...

		dma_addr = dma_map_single(dev, addr, size, direction);
		if (dma_mapping_error(dev, dma_addr)) {
			/*
			 * reduce current DMA mapping usage,
			 * delay and try again later or
			 * reset driver.
			 */
			goto map_error_handling;
		}
		array[i].dma_addr = dma_addr;
		save_index++;
	}

	...

	map_error_handling:

	for (i = 0; i < save_index; i++) {

		...

		dma_unmap_single(array[i].dma_addr);
	}

Networking drivers must call dev_kfree_skb() to free the socket buffer
and return NETDEV_TX_OK if the DMA mapping fails on the transmit hook
(ndo_start_xmit). This means that the socket buffer is just dropped in
the failure case.

SCSI drivers must return SCSI_MLQUEUE_HOST_BUSY if the DMA mapping
fails in the queuecommand hook. This means that the SCSI subsystem
passes the command to the driver again later.

Optimizing Unmap State Space Consumption
========================================

On many platforms, dma_unmap_{single,page}() is simply a nop.
Therefore, keeping track of the mapping address and length is a waste
of space.  Instead of filling your drivers up with ifdefs and the like
to "work around" this (which would defeat the whole purpose of a
portable API) the following facilities are provided.

Actually, instead of describing the macros one by one, we'll
transform some example code.

1) Use DEFINE_DMA_UNMAP_{ADDR,LEN} in state saving structures.
   Example, before::

	struct ring_state {
		struct sk_buff *skb;
		dma_addr_t mapping;
		__u32 len;
	};

   after::

	struct ring_state {
		struct sk_buff *skb;
		DEFINE_DMA_UNMAP_ADDR(mapping);
		DEFINE_DMA_UNMAP_LEN(len);
	};

2) Use dma_unmap_{addr,len}_set() to set these values.
   Example, before::

	ringp->mapping = FOO;
	ringp->len = BAR;

   after::

	dma_unmap_addr_set(ringp, mapping, FOO);
	dma_unmap_len_set(ringp, len, BAR);

3) Use dma_unmap_{addr,len}() to access these values.
   Example, before::

	dma_unmap_single(dev, ringp->mapping, ringp->len,
			 DMA_FROM_DEVICE);

   after::

	dma_unmap_single(dev,
			 dma_unmap_addr(ringp, mapping),
			 dma_unmap_len(ringp, len),
			 DMA_FROM_DEVICE);

It really should be self-explanatory.  We treat the ADDR and LEN
separately, because it is possible for an implementation to only
need the address in order to perform the unmap operation.

Platform Issues
===============

If you are just writing drivers for Linux and do not maintain
an architecture port for the kernel, you can safely skip down
to "Closing".

1) Struct scatterlist requirements.

   You need to enable CONFIG_NEED_SG_DMA_LENGTH if the architecture
   supports IOMMUs (including software IOMMU).

2) ARCH_DMA_MINALIGN

   Architectures must ensure that kmalloc'ed buffer is
   DMA-safe. Drivers and subsystems depend on it. If an architecture
   isn't fully DMA-coherent (i.e. hardware doesn't ensure that data in
   the CPU cache is identical to data in main memory),
   ARCH_DMA_MINALIGN must be set so that the memory allocator
   makes sure that kmalloc'ed buffer doesn't share a cache line with
   the others. See arch/arm/include/asm/cache.h as an example.

   Note that ARCH_DMA_MINALIGN is about DMA memory alignment
   constraints. You don't need to worry about the architecture data
   alignment constraints (e.g. the alignment constraints about 64-bit
   objects).

Closing
=======

This document, and the API itself, would not be in its current
form without the feedback and suggestions from numerous individuals.
We would like to specifically mention, in no particular order, the
following people::

	Russell King <rmk@arm.linux.org.uk>
	Leo Dagum <dagum@barrel.engr.sgi.com>
	Ralf Baechle <ralf@oss.sgi.com>
	Grant Grundler <grundler@cup.hp.com>
	Jay Estabrook <Jay.Estabrook@compaq.com>
	Thomas Sailer <sailer@ife.ee.ethz.ch>
	Andrea Arcangeli <andrea@suse.de>
	Jens Axboe <jens.axboe@oracle.com>
	David Mosberger-Tang <davidm@hpl.hp.com>
============================================
Dynamic DMA mapping using the generic device
============================================

:Author: James E.J. Bottomley <James.Bottomley@HansenPartnership.com>

This document describes the DMA API.  For a more gentle introduction
of the API (and actual examples), see Documentation/core-api/dma-api-howto.rst.

This API is split into two pieces.  Part I describes the basic API.
Part II describes extensions for supporting non-consistent memory
machines.  Unless you know that your driver absolutely has to support
non-consistent platforms (this is usually only legacy platforms) you
should only use the API described in part I.

Part I - dma_API
----------------

To get the dma_API, you must #include <linux/dma-mapping.h>.  This
provides dma_addr_t and the interfaces described below.

A dma_addr_t can hold any valid DMA address for the platform.  It can be
given to a device to use as a DMA source or target.  A CPU cannot reference
a dma_addr_t directly because there may be translation between its physical
address space and the DMA address space.

Part Ia - Using large DMA-coherent buffers
------------------------------------------

::

	void *
	dma_alloc_coherent(struct device *dev, size_t size,
			   dma_addr_t *dma_handle, gfp_t flag)

Consistent memory is memory for which a write by either the device or
the processor can immediately be read by the processor or device
without having to worry about caching effects.  (You may however need
to make sure to flush the processor's write buffers before telling
devices to read that memory.)

This routine allocates a region of <size> bytes of consistent memory.

It returns a pointer to the allocated region (in the processor's virtual
address space) or NULL if the allocation failed.

It also returns a <dma_handle> which may be cast to an unsigned integer the
same width as the bus and given to the device as the DMA address base of
the region.

Note: consistent memory can be expensive on some platforms, and the
minimum allocation length may be as big as a page, so you should
consolidate your requests for consistent memory as much as possible.
The simplest way to do that is to use the dma_pool calls (see below).

The flag parameter (dma_alloc_coherent() only) allows the caller to
specify the ``GFP_`` flags (see kmalloc()) for the allocation (the
implementation may choose to ignore flags that affect the location of
the returned memory, like GFP_DMA).

::

	void
	dma_free_coherent(struct device *dev, size_t size, void *cpu_addr,
			  dma_addr_t dma_handle)

Free a region of consistent memory you previously allocated.  dev,
size and dma_handle must all be the same as those passed into
dma_alloc_coherent().  cpu_addr must be the virtual address returned by
the dma_alloc_coherent().

Note that unlike their sibling allocation calls, these routines
may only be called with IRQs enabled.


Part Ib - Using small DMA-coherent buffers
------------------------------------------

To get this part of the dma_API, you must #include <linux/dmapool.h>

Many drivers need lots of small DMA-coherent memory regions for DMA
descriptors or I/O buffers.  Rather than allocating in units of a page
or more using dma_alloc_coherent(), you can use DMA pools.  These work
much like a struct kmem_cache, except that they use the DMA-coherent allocator,
not __get_free_pages().  Also, they understand common hardware constraints
for alignment, like queue heads needing to be aligned on N-byte boundaries.


::

	struct dma_pool *
	dma_pool_create(const char *name, struct device *dev,
			size_t size, size_t align, size_t alloc);

dma_pool_create() initializes a pool of DMA-coherent buffers
for use with a given device.  It must be called in a context which
can sleep.

The "name" is for diagnostics (like a struct kmem_cache name); dev and size
are like what you'd pass to dma_alloc_coherent().  The device's hardware
alignment requirement for this type of data is "align" (which is expressed
in bytes, and must be a power of two).  If your device has no boundary
crossing restrictions, pass 0 for alloc; passing 4096 says memory allocated
from this pool must not cross 4KByte boundaries.

::

	void *
	dma_pool_zalloc(struct dma_pool *pool, gfp_t mem_flags,
		        dma_addr_t *handle)

Wraps dma_pool_alloc() and also zeroes the returned memory if the
allocation attempt succeeded.


::

	void *
	dma_pool_alloc(struct dma_pool *pool, gfp_t gfp_flags,
		       dma_addr_t *dma_handle);

This allocates memory from the pool; the returned memory will meet the
size and alignment requirements specified at creation time.  Pass
GFP_ATOMIC to prevent blocking, or if it's permitted (not
in_interrupt, not holding SMP locks), pass GFP_KERNEL to allow
blocking.  Like dma_alloc_coherent(), this returns two values:  an
address usable by the CPU, and the DMA address usable by the pool's
device.

::

	void
	dma_pool_free(struct dma_pool *pool, void *vaddr,
		      dma_addr_t addr);

This puts memory back into the pool.  The pool is what was passed to
dma_pool_alloc(); the CPU (vaddr) and DMA addresses are what
were returned when that routine allocated the memory being freed.

::

	void
	dma_pool_destroy(struct dma_pool *pool);

dma_pool_destroy() frees the resources of the pool.  It must be
called in a context which can sleep.  Make sure you've freed all allocated
memory back to the pool before you destroy it.


Part Ic - DMA addressing limitations
------------------------------------

::

	int
	dma_set_mask_and_coherent(struct device *dev, u64 mask)

Checks to see if the mask is possible and updates the device
streaming and coherent DMA mask parameters if it is.

Returns: 0 if successful and a negative error if not.

::

	int
	dma_set_mask(struct device *dev, u64 mask)

Checks to see if the mask is possible and updates the device
parameters if it is.

Returns: 0 if successful and a negative error if not.

::

	int
	dma_set_coherent_mask(struct device *dev, u64 mask)

Checks to see if the mask is possible and updates the device
parameters if it is.

Returns: 0 if successful and a negative error if not.

::

	u64
	dma_get_required_mask(struct device *dev)

This API returns the mask that the platform requires to
operate efficiently.  Usually this means the returned mask
is the minimum required to cover all of memory.  Examining the
required mask gives drivers with variable descriptor sizes the
opportunity to use smaller descriptors as necessary.

Requesting the required mask does not alter the current mask.  If you
wish to take advantage of it, you should issue a dma_set_mask()
call to set the mask to the value returned.

::

	size_t
	dma_max_mapping_size(struct device *dev);

Returns the maximum size of a mapping for the device. The size parameter
of the mapping functions like dma_map_single(), dma_map_page() and
others should not be larger than the returned value.

::

	size_t
	dma_opt_mapping_size(struct device *dev);

Returns the maximum optimal size of a mapping for the device.

Mapping larger buffers may take much longer in certain scenarios. In
addition, for high-rate short-lived streaming mappings, the upfront time
spent on the mapping may account for an appreciable part of the total
request lifetime. As such, if splitting larger requests incurs no
significant performance penalty, then device drivers are advised to
limit total DMA streaming mappings length to the returned value.

::

	bool
	dma_need_sync(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t dma_addr);

Returns %true if dma_sync_single_for_{device,cpu} calls are required to
transfer memory ownership.  Returns %false if those calls can be skipped.

::

	unsigned long
	dma_get_merge_boundary(struct device *dev);

Returns the DMA merge boundary. If the device cannot merge any the DMA address
segments, the function returns 0.

Part Id - Streaming DMA mappings
--------------------------------

::

	dma_addr_t
	dma_map_single(struct device *dev, void *cpu_addr, size_t size,
		       enum dma_data_direction direction)

Maps a piece of processor virtual memory so it can be accessed by the
device and returns the DMA address of the memory.

The direction for both APIs may be converted freely by casting.
However the dma_API uses a strongly typed enumerator for its
direction:

======================= =============================================
DMA_NONE		no direction (used for debugging)
DMA_TO_DEVICE		data is going from the memory to the device
DMA_FROM_DEVICE		data is coming from the device to the memory
DMA_BIDIRECTIONAL	direction isn't known
======================= =============================================

.. note::

	Not all memory regions in a machine can be mapped by this API.
	Further, contiguous kernel virtual space may not be contiguous as
	physical memory.  Since this API does not provide any scatter/gather
	capability, it will fail if the user tries to map a non-physically
	contiguous piece of memory.  For this reason, memory to be mapped by
	this API should be obtained from sources which guarantee it to be
	physically contiguous (like kmalloc).

	Further, the DMA address of the memory must be within the
	dma_mask of the device (the dma_mask is a bit mask of the
	addressable region for the device, i.e., if the DMA address of
	the memory ANDed with the dma_mask is still equal to the DMA
	address, then the device can perform DMA to the memory).  To
	ensure that the memory allocated by kmalloc is within the dma_mask,
	the driver may specify various platform-dependent flags to restrict
	the DMA address range of the allocation (e.g., on x86, GFP_DMA
	guarantees to be within the first 16MB of available DMA addresses,
	as required by ISA devices).

	Note also that the above constraints on physical contiguity and
	dma_mask may not apply if the platform has an IOMMU (a device which
	maps an I/O DMA address to a physical memory address).  However, to be
	portable, device driver writers may *not* assume that such an IOMMU
	exists.

.. warning::

	Memory coherency operates at a granularity called the cache
	line width.  In order for memory mapped by this API to operate
	correctly, the mapped region must begin exactly on a cache line
	boundary and end exactly on one (to prevent two separately mapped
	regions from sharing a single cache line).  Since the cache line size
	may not be known at compile time, the API will not enforce this
	requirement.  Therefore, it is recommended that driver writers who
	don't take special care to determine the cache line size at run time
	only map virtual regions that begin and end on page boundaries (which
	are guaranteed also to be cache line boundaries).

	DMA_TO_DEVICE synchronisation must be done after the last modification
	of the memory region by the software and before it is handed off to
	the device.  Once this primitive is used, memory covered by this
	primitive should be treated as read-only by the device.  If the device
	may write to it at any point, it should be DMA_BIDIRECTIONAL (see
	below).

	DMA_FROM_DEVICE synchronisation must be done before the driver
	accesses data that may be changed by the device.  This memory should
	be treated as read-only by the driver.  If the driver needs to write
	to it at any point, it should be DMA_BIDIRECTIONAL (see below).

	DMA_BIDIRECTIONAL requires special handling: it means that the driver
	isn't sure if the memory was modified before being handed off to the
	device and also isn't sure if the device will also modify it.  Thus,
	you must always sync bidirectional memory twice: once before the
	memory is handed off to the device (to make sure all memory changes
	are flushed from the processor) and once before the data may be
	accessed after being used by the device (to make sure any processor
	cache lines are updated with data that the device may have changed).

::

	void
	dma_unmap_single(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t dma_addr, size_t size,
			 enum dma_data_direction direction)

Unmaps the region previously mapped.  All the parameters passed in
must be identical to those passed in (and returned) by the mapping
API.

::

	dma_addr_t
	dma_map_page(struct device *dev, struct page *page,
		     unsigned long offset, size_t size,
		     enum dma_data_direction direction)

	void
	dma_unmap_page(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t dma_address, size_t size,
		       enum dma_data_direction direction)

API for mapping and unmapping for pages.  All the notes and warnings
for the other mapping APIs apply here.  Also, although the <offset>
and <size> parameters are provided to do partial page mapping, it is
recommended that you never use these unless you really know what the
cache width is.

::

	dma_addr_t
	dma_map_resource(struct device *dev, phys_addr_t phys_addr, size_t size,
			 enum dma_data_direction dir, unsigned long attrs)

	void
	dma_unmap_resource(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t addr, size_t size,
			   enum dma_data_direction dir, unsigned long attrs)

API for mapping and unmapping for MMIO resources. All the notes and
warnings for the other mapping APIs apply here. The API should only be
used to map device MMIO resources, mapping of RAM is not permitted.

::

	int
	dma_mapping_error(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t dma_addr)

In some circumstances dma_map_single(), dma_map_page() and dma_map_resource()
will fail to create a mapping. A driver can check for these errors by testing
the returned DMA address with dma_mapping_error(). A non-zero return value
means the mapping could not be created and the driver should take appropriate
action (e.g. reduce current DMA mapping usage or delay and try again later).

::

	int
	dma_map_sg(struct device *dev, struct scatterlist *sg,
		   int nents, enum dma_data_direction direction)

Returns: the number of DMA address segments mapped (this may be shorter
than <nents> passed in if some elements of the scatter/gather list are
physically or virtually adjacent and an IOMMU maps them with a single
entry).

Please note that the sg cannot be mapped again if it has been mapped once.
The mapping process is allowed to destroy information in the sg.

As with the other mapping interfaces, dma_map_sg() can fail. When it
does, 0 is returned and a driver must take appropriate action. It is
critical that the driver do something, in the case of a block driver
aborting the request or even oopsing is better than doing nothing and
corrupting the filesystem.

With scatterlists, you use the resulting mapping like this::

	int i, count = dma_map_sg(dev, sglist, nents, direction);
	struct scatterlist *sg;

	for_each_sg(sglist, sg, count, i) {
		hw_address[i] = sg_dma_address(sg);
		hw_len[i] = sg_dma_len(sg);
	}

where nents is the number of entries in the sglist.

The implementation is free to merge several consecutive sglist entries
into one (e.g. with an IOMMU, or if several pages just happen to be
physically contiguous) and returns the actual number of sg entries it
mapped them to. On failure 0, is returned.

Then you should loop count times (note: this can be less than nents times)
and use sg_dma_address() and sg_dma_len() macros where you previously
accessed sg->address and sg->length as shown above.

::

	void
	dma_unmap_sg(struct device *dev, struct scatterlist *sg,
		     int nents, enum dma_data_direction direction)

Unmap the previously mapped scatter/gather list.  All the parameters
must be the same as those and passed in to the scatter/gather mapping
API.

Note: <nents> must be the number you passed in, *not* the number of
DMA address entries returned.

::

	void
	dma_sync_single_for_cpu(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t dma_handle,
				size_t size,
				enum dma_data_direction direction)

	void
	dma_sync_single_for_device(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t dma_handle,
				   size_t size,
				   enum dma_data_direction direction)

	void
	dma_sync_sg_for_cpu(struct device *dev, struct scatterlist *sg,
			    int nents,
			    enum dma_data_direction direction)

	void
	dma_sync_sg_for_device(struct device *dev, struct scatterlist *sg,
			       int nents,
			       enum dma_data_direction direction)

Synchronise a single contiguous or scatter/gather mapping for the CPU
and device. With the sync_sg API, all the parameters must be the same
as those passed into the sg mapping API. With the sync_single API,
you can use dma_handle and size parameters that aren't identical to
those passed into the single mapping API to do a partial sync.


.. note::

   You must do this:

   - Before reading values that have been written by DMA from the device
     (use the DMA_FROM_DEVICE direction)
   - After writing values that will be written to the device using DMA
     (use the DMA_TO_DEVICE) direction
   - before *and* after handing memory to the device if the memory is
     DMA_BIDIRECTIONAL

See also dma_map_single().

::

	dma_addr_t
	dma_map_single_attrs(struct device *dev, void *cpu_addr, size_t size,
			     enum dma_data_direction dir,
			     unsigned long attrs)

	void
	dma_unmap_single_attrs(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t dma_addr,
			       size_t size, enum dma_data_direction dir,
			       unsigned long attrs)

	int
	dma_map_sg_attrs(struct device *dev, struct scatterlist *sgl,
			 int nents, enum dma_data_direction dir,
			 unsigned long attrs)

	void
	dma_unmap_sg_attrs(struct device *dev, struct scatterlist *sgl,
			   int nents, enum dma_data_direction dir,
			   unsigned long attrs)

The four functions above are just like the counterpart functions
without the _attrs suffixes, except that they pass an optional
dma_attrs.

The interpretation of DMA attributes is architecture-specific, and
each attribute should be documented in
Documentation/core-api/dma-attributes.rst.

If dma_attrs are 0, the semantics of each of these functions
is identical to those of the corresponding function
without the _attrs suffix. As a result dma_map_single_attrs()
can generally replace dma_map_single(), etc.

As an example of the use of the ``*_attrs`` functions, here's how
you could pass an attribute DMA_ATTR_FOO when mapping memory
for DMA::

	#include <linux/dma-mapping.h>
	/* DMA_ATTR_FOO should be defined in linux/dma-mapping.h and
	* documented in Documentation/core-api/dma-attributes.rst */
	...

		unsigned long attr;
		attr |= DMA_ATTR_FOO;
		....
		n = dma_map_sg_attrs(dev, sg, nents, DMA_TO_DEVICE, attr);
		....

Architectures that care about DMA_ATTR_FOO would check for its
presence in their implementations of the mapping and unmapping
routines, e.g.:::

	void whizco_dma_map_sg_attrs(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t dma_addr,
				     size_t size, enum dma_data_direction dir,
				     unsigned long attrs)
	{
		....
		if (attrs & DMA_ATTR_FOO)
			/* twizzle the frobnozzle */
		....
	}


Part II - Non-coherent DMA allocations
--------------------------------------

These APIs allow to allocate pages that are guaranteed to be DMA addressable
by the passed in device, but which need explicit management of memory ownership
for the kernel vs the device.

If you don't understand how cache line coherency works between a processor and
an I/O device, you should not be using this part of the API.

::

	struct page *
	dma_alloc_pages(struct device *dev, size_t size, dma_addr_t *dma_handle,
			enum dma_data_direction dir, gfp_t gfp)

This routine allocates a region of <size> bytes of non-coherent memory.  It
returns a pointer to first struct page for the region, or NULL if the
allocation failed. The resulting struct page can be used for everything a
struct page is suitable for.

It also returns a <dma_handle> which may be cast to an unsigned integer the
same width as the bus and given to the device as the DMA address base of
the region.

The dir parameter specified if data is read and/or written by the device,
see dma_map_single() for details.

The gfp parameter allows the caller to specify the ``GFP_`` flags (see
kmalloc()) for the allocation, but rejects flags used to specify a memory
zone such as GFP_DMA or GFP_HIGHMEM.

Before giving the memory to the device, dma_sync_single_for_device() needs
to be called, and before reading memory written by the device,
dma_sync_single_for_cpu(), just like for streaming DMA mappings that are
reused.

::

	void
	dma_free_pages(struct device *dev, size_t size, struct page *page,
			dma_addr_t dma_handle, enum dma_data_direction dir)

Free a region of memory previously allocated using dma_alloc_pages().
dev, size, dma_handle and dir must all be the same as those passed into
dma_alloc_pages().  page must be the pointer returned by dma_alloc_pages().

::

	int
	dma_mmap_pages(struct device *dev, struct vm_area_struct *vma,
		       size_t size, struct page *page)

Map an allocation returned from dma_alloc_pages() into a user address space.
dev and size must be the same as those passed into dma_alloc_pages().
page must be the pointer returned by dma_alloc_pages().

::

	void *
	dma_alloc_noncoherent(struct device *dev, size_t size,
			dma_addr_t *dma_handle, enum dma_data_direction dir,
			gfp_t gfp)

This routine is a convenient wrapper around dma_alloc_pages that returns the
kernel virtual address for the allocated memory instead of the page structure.

::

	void
	dma_free_noncoherent(struct device *dev, size_t size, void *cpu_addr,
			dma_addr_t dma_handle, enum dma_data_direction dir)

Free a region of memory previously allocated using dma_alloc_noncoherent().
dev, size, dma_handle and dir must all be the same as those passed into
dma_alloc_noncoherent().  cpu_addr must be the virtual address returned by
dma_alloc_noncoherent().

::

	struct sg_table *
	dma_alloc_noncontiguous(struct device *dev, size_t size,
				enum dma_data_direction dir, gfp_t gfp,
				unsigned long attrs);

This routine allocates  <size> bytes of non-coherent and possibly non-contiguous
memory.  It returns a pointer to struct sg_table that describes the allocated
and DMA mapped memory, or NULL if the allocation failed. The resulting memory
can be used for struct page mapped into a scatterlist are suitable for.

The return sg_table is guaranteed to have 1 single DMA mapped segment as
indicated by sgt->nents, but it might have multiple CPU side segments as
indicated by sgt->orig_nents.

The dir parameter specified if data is read and/or written by the device,
see dma_map_single() for details.

The gfp parameter allows the caller to specify the ``GFP_`` flags (see
kmalloc()) for the allocation, but rejects flags used to specify a memory
zone such as GFP_DMA or GFP_HIGHMEM.

The attrs argument must be either 0 or DMA_ATTR_ALLOC_SINGLE_PAGES.

Before giving the memory to the device, dma_sync_sgtable_for_device() needs
to be called, and before reading memory written by the device,
dma_sync_sgtable_for_cpu(), just like for streaming DMA mappings that are
reused.

::

	void
	dma_free_noncontiguous(struct device *dev, size_t size,
			       struct sg_table *sgt,
			       enum dma_data_direction dir)

Free memory previously allocated using dma_alloc_noncontiguous().  dev, size,
and dir must all be the same as those passed into dma_alloc_noncontiguous().
sgt must be the pointer returned by dma_alloc_noncontiguous().

::

	void *
	dma_vmap_noncontiguous(struct device *dev, size_t size,
		struct sg_table *sgt)

Return a contiguous kernel mapping for an allocation returned from
dma_alloc_noncontiguous().  dev and size must be the same as those passed into
dma_alloc_noncontiguous().  sgt must be the pointer returned by
dma_alloc_noncontiguous().

Once a non-contiguous allocation is mapped using this function, the
flush_kernel_vmap_range() and invalidate_kernel_vmap_range() APIs must be used
to manage the coherency between the kernel mapping, the device and user space
mappings (if any).

::

	void
	dma_vunmap_noncontiguous(struct device *dev, void *vaddr)

Unmap a kernel mapping returned by dma_vmap_noncontiguous().  dev must be the
same the one passed into dma_alloc_noncontiguous().  vaddr must be the pointer
returned by dma_vmap_noncontiguous().


::

	int
	dma_mmap_noncontiguous(struct device *dev, struct vm_area_struct *vma,
			       size_t size, struct sg_table *sgt)

Map an allocation returned from dma_alloc_noncontiguous() into a user address
space.  dev and size must be the same as those passed into
dma_alloc_noncontiguous().  sgt must be the pointer returned by
dma_alloc_noncontiguous().

::

	int
	dma_get_cache_alignment(void)

Returns the processor cache alignment.  This is the absolute minimum
alignment *and* width that you must observe when either mapping
memory or doing partial flushes.

.. note::

	This API may return a number *larger* than the actual cache
	line, but it will guarantee that one or more cache lines fit exactly
	into the width returned by this call.  It will also always be a power
	of two for easy alignment.


Part III - Debug drivers use of the DMA-API
-------------------------------------------

The DMA-API as described above has some constraints. DMA addresses must be
released with the corresponding function with the same size for example. With
the advent of hardware IOMMUs it becomes more and more important that drivers
do not violate those constraints. In the worst case such a violation can
result in data corruption up to destroyed filesystems.

To debug drivers and find bugs in the usage of the DMA-API checking code can
be compiled into the kernel which will tell the developer about those
violations. If your architecture supports it you can select the "Enable
debugging of DMA-API usage" option in your kernel configuration. Enabling this
option has a performance impact. Do not enable it in production kernels.

If you boot the resulting kernel will contain code which does some bookkeeping
about what DMA memory was allocated for which device. If this code detects an
error it prints a warning message with some details into your kernel log. An
example warning message may look like this::

	WARNING: at /data2/repos/linux-2.6-iommu/lib/dma-debug.c:448
		check_unmap+0x203/0x490()
	Hardware name:
	forcedeth 0000:00:08.0: DMA-API: device driver frees DMA memory with wrong
		function [device address=0x00000000640444be] [size=66 bytes] [mapped as
	single] [unmapped as page]
	Modules linked in: nfsd exportfs bridge stp llc r8169
	Pid: 0, comm: swapper Tainted: G        W  2.6.28-dmatest-09289-g8bb99c0 #1
	Call Trace:
	<IRQ>  [<ffffffff80240b22>] warn_slowpath+0xf2/0x130
	[<ffffffff80647b70>] _spin_unlock+0x10/0x30
	[<ffffffff80537e75>] usb_hcd_link_urb_to_ep+0x75/0xc0
	[<ffffffff80647c22>] _spin_unlock_irqrestore+0x12/0x40
	[<ffffffff8055347f>] ohci_urb_enqueue+0x19f/0x7c0
	[<ffffffff80252f96>] queue_work+0x56/0x60
	[<ffffffff80237e10>] enqueue_task_fair+0x20/0x50
	[<ffffffff80539279>] usb_hcd_submit_urb+0x379/0xbc0
	[<ffffffff803b78c3>] cpumask_next_and+0x23/0x40
	[<ffffffff80235177>] find_busiest_group+0x207/0x8a0
	[<ffffffff8064784f>] _spin_lock_irqsave+0x1f/0x50
	[<ffffffff803c7ea3>] check_unmap+0x203/0x490
	[<ffffffff803c8259>] debug_dma_unmap_page+0x49/0x50
	[<ffffffff80485f26>] nv_tx_done_optimized+0xc6/0x2c0
	[<ffffffff80486c13>] nv_nic_irq_optimized+0x73/0x2b0
	[<ffffffff8026df84>] handle_IRQ_event+0x34/0x70
	[<ffffffff8026ffe9>] handle_edge_irq+0xc9/0x150
	[<ffffffff8020e3ab>] do_IRQ+0xcb/0x1c0
	[<ffffffff8020c093>] ret_from_intr+0x0/0xa
	<EOI> <4>---[ end trace f6435a98e2a38c0e ]---

The driver developer can find the driver and the device including a stacktrace
of the DMA-API call which caused this warning.

Per default only the first error will result in a warning message. All other
errors will only silently counted. This limitation exist to prevent the code
from flooding your kernel log. To support debugging a device driver this can
be disabled via debugfs. See the debugfs interface documentation below for
details.

The debugfs directory for the DMA-API debugging code is called dma-api/. In
this directory the following files can currently be found:

=============================== ===============================================
dma-api/all_errors		This file contains a numeric value. If this
				value is not equal to zero the debugging code
				will print a warning for every error it finds
				into the kernel log. Be careful with this
				option, as it can easily flood your logs.

dma-api/disabled		This read-only file contains the character 'Y'
				if the debugging code is disabled. This can
				happen when it runs out of memory or if it was
				disabled at boot time

dma-api/dump			This read-only file contains current DMA
				mappings.

dma-api/error_count		This file is read-only and shows the total
				numbers of errors found.

dma-api/num_errors		The number in this file shows how many
				warnings will be printed to the kernel log
				before it stops. This number is initialized to
				one at system boot and be set by writing into
				this file

dma-api/min_free_entries	This read-only file can be read to get the
				minimum number of free dma_debug_entries the
				allocator has ever seen. If this value goes
				down to zero the code will attempt to increase
				nr_total_entries to compensate.

dma-api/num_free_entries	The current number of free dma_debug_entries
				in the allocator.

dma-api/nr_total_entries	The total number of dma_debug_entries in the
				allocator, both free and used.

dma-api/driver_filter		You can write a name of a driver into this file
				to limit the debug output to requests from that
				particular driver. Write an empty string to
				that file to disable the filter and see
				all errors again.
=============================== ===============================================

If you have this code compiled into your kernel it will be enabled by default.
If you want to boot without the bookkeeping anyway you can provide
'dma_debug=off' as a boot parameter. This will disable DMA-API debugging.
Notice that you can not enable it again at runtime. You have to reboot to do
so.

If you want to see debug messages only for a special device driver you can
specify the dma_debug_driver=<drivername> parameter. This will enable the
driver filter at boot time. The debug code will only print errors for that
driver afterwards. This filter can be disabled or changed later using debugfs.

When the code disables itself at runtime this is most likely because it ran
out of dma_debug_entries and was unable to allocate more on-demand. 65536
entries are preallocated at boot - if this is too low for you boot with
'dma_debug_entries=<your_desired_number>' to overwrite the default. Note
that the code allocates entries in batches, so the exact number of
preallocated entries may be greater than the actual number requested. The
code will print to the kernel log each time it has dynamically allocated
as many entries as were initially preallocated. This is to indicate that a
larger preallocation size may be appropriate, or if it happens continually
that a driver may be leaking mappings.

::

	void
	debug_dma_mapping_error(struct device *dev, dma_addr_t dma_addr);

dma-debug interface debug_dma_mapping_error() to debug drivers that fail
to check DMA mapping errors on addresses returned by dma_map_single() and
dma_map_page() interfaces. This interface clears a flag set by
debug_dma_map_page() to indicate that dma_mapping_error() has been called by
the driver. When driver does unmap, debug_dma_unmap() checks the flag and if
this flag is still set, prints warning message that includes call trace that
leads up to the unmap. This interface can be called from dma_mapping_error()
routines to enable DMA mapping error check debugging.
==============
DMA attributes
==============

This document describes the semantics of the DMA attributes that are
defined in linux/dma-mapping.h.

DMA_ATTR_WEAK_ORDERING
----------------------

DMA_ATTR_WEAK_ORDERING specifies that reads and writes to the mapping
may be weakly ordered, that is that reads and writes may pass each other.

Since it is optional for platforms to implement DMA_ATTR_WEAK_ORDERING,
those that do not will simply ignore the attribute and exhibit default
behavior.

DMA_ATTR_WRITE_COMBINE
----------------------

DMA_ATTR_WRITE_COMBINE specifies that writes to the mapping may be
buffered to improve performance.

Since it is optional for platforms to implement DMA_ATTR_WRITE_COMBINE,
those that do not will simply ignore the attribute and exhibit default
behavior.

DMA_ATTR_NO_KERNEL_MAPPING
--------------------------

DMA_ATTR_NO_KERNEL_MAPPING lets the platform to avoid creating a kernel
virtual mapping for the allocated buffer. On some architectures creating
such mapping is non-trivial task and consumes very limited resources
(like kernel virtual address space or dma consistent address space).
Buffers allocated with this attribute can be only passed to user space
by calling dma_mmap_attrs(). By using this API, you are guaranteeing
that you won't dereference the pointer returned by dma_alloc_attr(). You
can treat it as a cookie that must be passed to dma_mmap_attrs() and
dma_free_attrs(). Make sure that both of these also get this attribute
set on each call.

Since it is optional for platforms to implement
DMA_ATTR_NO_KERNEL_MAPPING, those that do not will simply ignore the
attribute and exhibit default behavior.

DMA_ATTR_SKIP_CPU_SYNC
----------------------

By default dma_map_{single,page,sg} functions family transfer a given
buffer from CPU domain to device domain. Some advanced use cases might
require sharing a buffer between more than one device. This requires
having a mapping created separately for each device and is usually
performed by calling dma_map_{single,page,sg} function more than once
for the given buffer with device pointer to each device taking part in
the buffer sharing. The first call transfers a buffer from 'CPU' domain
to 'device' domain, what synchronizes CPU caches for the given region
(usually it means that the cache has been flushed or invalidated
depending on the dma direction). However, next calls to
dma_map_{single,page,sg}() for other devices will perform exactly the
same synchronization operation on the CPU cache. CPU cache synchronization
might be a time consuming operation, especially if the buffers are
large, so it is highly recommended to avoid it if possible.
DMA_ATTR_SKIP_CPU_SYNC allows platform code to skip synchronization of
the CPU cache for the given buffer assuming that it has been already
transferred to 'device' domain. This attribute can be also used for
dma_unmap_{single,page,sg} functions family to force buffer to stay in
device domain after releasing a mapping for it. Use this attribute with
care!

DMA_ATTR_FORCE_CONTIGUOUS
-------------------------

By default DMA-mapping subsystem is allowed to assemble the buffer
allocated by dma_alloc_attrs() function from individual pages if it can
be mapped as contiguous chunk into device dma address space. By
specifying this attribute the allocated buffer is forced to be contiguous
also in physical memory.

DMA_ATTR_ALLOC_SINGLE_PAGES
---------------------------

This is a hint to the DMA-mapping subsystem that it's probably not worth
the time to try to allocate memory to in a way that gives better TLB
efficiency (AKA it's not worth trying to build the mapping out of larger
pages).  You might want to specify this if:

- You know that the accesses to this memory won't thrash the TLB.
  You might know that the accesses are likely to be sequential or
  that they aren't sequential but it's unlikely you'll ping-pong
  between many addresses that are likely to be in different physical
  pages.
- You know that the penalty of TLB misses while accessing the
  memory will be small enough to be inconsequential.  If you are
  doing a heavy operation like decryption or decompression this
  might be the case.
- You know that the DMA mapping is fairly transitory.  If you expect
  the mapping to have a short lifetime then it may be worth it to
  optimize allocation (avoid coming up with large pages) instead of
  getting the slight performance win of larger pages.

Setting this hint doesn't guarantee that you won't get huge pages, but it
means that we won't try quite as hard to get them.

.. note:: At the moment DMA_ATTR_ALLOC_SINGLE_PAGES is only implemented on ARM,
	  though ARM64 patches will likely be posted soon.

DMA_ATTR_NO_WARN
----------------

This tells the DMA-mapping subsystem to suppress allocation failure reports
(similarly to __GFP_NOWARN).

On some architectures allocation failures are reported with error messages
to the system logs.  Although this can help to identify and debug problems,
drivers which handle failures (eg, retry later) have no problems with them,
and can actually flood the system logs with error messages that aren't any
problem at all, depending on the implementation of the retry mechanism.

So, this provides a way for drivers to avoid those error messages on calls
where allocation failures are not a problem, and shouldn't bother the logs.

.. note:: At the moment DMA_ATTR_NO_WARN is only implemented on PowerPC.

DMA_ATTR_PRIVILEGED
-------------------

Some advanced peripherals such as remote processors and GPUs perform
accesses to DMA buffers in both privileged "supervisor" and unprivileged
"user" modes.  This attribute is used to indicate to the DMA-mapping
subsystem that the buffer is fully accessible at the elevated privilege
level (and ideally inaccessible or at least read-only at the
lesser-privileged levels).
============================
DMA with ISA and LPC devices
============================

:Author: Pierre Ossman <drzeus@drzeus.cx>

This document describes how to do DMA transfers using the old ISA DMA
controller. Even though ISA is more or less dead today the LPC bus
uses the same DMA system so it will be around for quite some time.

Headers and dependencies
------------------------

To do ISA style DMA you need to include two headers::

	#include <linux/dma-mapping.h>
	#include <asm/dma.h>

The first is the generic DMA API used to convert virtual addresses to
bus addresses (see Documentation/core-api/dma-api.rst for details).

The second contains the routines specific to ISA DMA transfers. Since
this is not present on all platforms make sure you construct your
Kconfig to be dependent on ISA_DMA_API (not ISA) so that nobody tries
to build your driver on unsupported platforms.

Buffer allocation
-----------------

The ISA DMA controller has some very strict requirements on which
memory it can access so extra care must be taken when allocating
buffers.

(You usually need a special buffer for DMA transfers instead of
transferring directly to and from your normal data structures.)

The DMA-able address space is the lowest 16 MB of _physical_ memory.
Also the transfer block may not cross page boundaries (which are 64
or 128 KiB depending on which channel you use).

In order to allocate a piece of memory that satisfies all these
requirements you pass the flag GFP_DMA to kmalloc.

Unfortunately the memory available for ISA DMA is scarce so unless you
allocate the memory during boot-up it's a good idea to also pass
__GFP_RETRY_MAYFAIL and __GFP_NOWARN to make the allocator try a bit harder.

(This scarcity also means that you should allocate the buffer as
early as possible and not release it until the driver is unloaded.)

Address translation
-------------------

To translate the virtual address to a bus address, use the normal DMA
API. Do _not_ use isa_virt_to_bus() even though it does the same
thing. The reason for this is that the function isa_virt_to_bus()
will require a Kconfig dependency to ISA, not just ISA_DMA_API which
is really all you need. Remember that even though the DMA controller
has its origins in ISA it is used elsewhere.

Note: x86_64 had a broken DMA API when it came to ISA but has since
been fixed. If your arch has problems then fix the DMA API instead of
reverting to the ISA functions.

Channels
--------

A normal ISA DMA controller has 8 channels. The lower four are for
8-bit transfers and the upper four are for 16-bit transfers.

(Actually the DMA controller is really two separate controllers where
channel 4 is used to give DMA access for the second controller (0-3).
This means that of the four 16-bits channels only three are usable.)

You allocate these in a similar fashion as all basic resources:

extern int request_dma(unsigned int dmanr, const char * device_id);
extern void free_dma(unsigned int dmanr);

The ability to use 16-bit or 8-bit transfers is _not_ up to you as a
driver author but depends on what the hardware supports. Check your
specs or test different channels.

Transfer data
-------------

Now for the good stuff, the actual DMA transfer. :)

Before you use any ISA DMA routines you need to claim the DMA lock
using claim_dma_lock(). The reason is that some DMA operations are
not atomic so only one driver may fiddle with the registers at a
time.

The first time you use the DMA controller you should call
clear_dma_ff(). This clears an internal register in the DMA
controller that is used for the non-atomic operations. As long as you
(and everyone else) uses the locking functions then you only need to
reset this once.

Next, you tell the controller in which direction you intend to do the
transfer using set_dma_mode(). Currently you have the options
DMA_MODE_READ and DMA_MODE_WRITE.

Set the address from where the transfer should start (this needs to
be 16-bit aligned for 16-bit transfers) and how many bytes to
transfer. Note that it's _bytes_. The DMA routines will do all the
required translation to values that the DMA controller understands.

The final step is enabling the DMA channel and releasing the DMA
lock.

Once the DMA transfer is finished (or timed out) you should disable
the channel again. You should also check get_dma_residue() to make
sure that all data has been transferred.

Example::

	int flags, residue;

	flags = claim_dma_lock();

	clear_dma_ff();

	set_dma_mode(channel, DMA_MODE_WRITE);
	set_dma_addr(channel, phys_addr);
	set_dma_count(channel, num_bytes);

	dma_enable(channel);

	release_dma_lock(flags);

	while (!device_done());

	flags = claim_dma_lock();

	dma_disable(channel);

	residue = dma_get_residue(channel);
	if (residue != 0)
		printk(KERN_ERR "driver: Incomplete DMA transfer!"
			" %d bytes left!\n", residue);

	release_dma_lock(flags);

Suspend/resume
--------------

It is the driver's responsibility to make sure that the machine isn't
suspended while a DMA transfer is in progress. Also, all DMA settings
are lost when the system suspends so if your driver relies on the DMA
controller being in a certain state then you have to restore these
registers upon resume.
Entry/exit handling for exceptions, interrupts, syscalls and KVM
================================================================

All transitions between execution domains require state updates which are
subject to strict ordering constraints. State updates are required for the
following:

  * Lockdep
  * RCU / Context tracking
  * Preemption counter
  * Tracing
  * Time accounting

The update order depends on the transition type and is explained below in
the transition type sections: `Syscalls`_, `KVM`_, `Interrupts and regular
exceptions`_, `NMI and NMI-like exceptions`_.

Non-instrumentable code - noinstr
---------------------------------

Most instrumentation facilities depend on RCU, so instrumentation is prohibited
for entry code before RCU starts watching and exit code after RCU stops
watching. In addition, many architectures must save and restore register state,
which means that (for example) a breakpoint in the breakpoint entry code would
overwrite the debug registers of the initial breakpoint.

Such code must be marked with the 'noinstr' attribute, placing that code into a
special section inaccessible to instrumentation and debug facilities. Some
functions are partially instrumentable, which is handled by marking them
noinstr and using instrumentation_begin() and instrumentation_end() to flag the
instrumentable ranges of code:

.. code-block:: c

  noinstr void entry(void)
  {
  	handle_entry();     // <-- must be 'noinstr' or '__always_inline'
	...

	instrumentation_begin();
	handle_context();   // <-- instrumentable code
	instrumentation_end();

	...
	handle_exit();      // <-- must be 'noinstr' or '__always_inline'
  }

This allows verification of the 'noinstr' restrictions via objtool on
supported architectures.

Invoking non-instrumentable functions from instrumentable context has no
restrictions and is useful to protect e.g. state switching which would
cause malfunction if instrumented.

All non-instrumentable entry/exit code sections before and after the RCU
state transitions must run with interrupts disabled.

Syscalls
--------

Syscall-entry code starts in assembly code and calls out into low-level C code
after establishing low-level architecture-specific state and stack frames. This
low-level C code must not be instrumented. A typical syscall handling function
invoked from low-level assembly code looks like this:

.. code-block:: c

  noinstr void syscall(struct pt_regs *regs, int nr)
  {
	arch_syscall_enter(regs);
	nr = syscall_enter_from_user_mode(regs, nr);

	instrumentation_begin();
	if (!invoke_syscall(regs, nr) && nr != -1)
	 	result_reg(regs) = __sys_ni_syscall(regs);
	instrumentation_end();

	syscall_exit_to_user_mode(regs);
  }

syscall_enter_from_user_mode() first invokes enter_from_user_mode() which
establishes state in the following order:

  * Lockdep
  * RCU / Context tracking
  * Tracing

and then invokes the various entry work functions like ptrace, seccomp, audit,
syscall tracing, etc. After all that is done, the instrumentable invoke_syscall
function can be invoked. The instrumentable code section then ends, after which
syscall_exit_to_user_mode() is invoked.

syscall_exit_to_user_mode() handles all work which needs to be done before
returning to user space like tracing, audit, signals, task work etc. After
that it invokes exit_to_user_mode() which again handles the state
transition in the reverse order:

  * Tracing
  * RCU / Context tracking
  * Lockdep

syscall_enter_from_user_mode() and syscall_exit_to_user_mode() are also
available as fine grained subfunctions in cases where the architecture code
has to do extra work between the various steps. In such cases it has to
ensure that enter_from_user_mode() is called first on entry and
exit_to_user_mode() is called last on exit.

Do not nest syscalls. Nested systcalls will cause RCU and/or context tracking
to print a warning.

KVM
---

Entering or exiting guest mode is very similar to syscalls. From the host
kernel point of view the CPU goes off into user space when entering the
guest and returns to the kernel on exit.

kvm_guest_enter_irqoff() is a KVM-specific variant of exit_to_user_mode()
and kvm_guest_exit_irqoff() is the KVM variant of enter_from_user_mode().
The state operations have the same ordering.

Task work handling is done separately for guest at the boundary of the
vcpu_run() loop via xfer_to_guest_mode_handle_work() which is a subset of
the work handled on return to user space.

Do not nest KVM entry/exit transitions because doing so is nonsensical.

Interrupts and regular exceptions
---------------------------------

Interrupts entry and exit handling is slightly more complex than syscalls
and KVM transitions.

If an interrupt is raised while the CPU executes in user space, the entry
and exit handling is exactly the same as for syscalls.

If the interrupt is raised while the CPU executes in kernel space the entry and
exit handling is slightly different. RCU state is only updated when the
interrupt is raised in the context of the CPU's idle task. Otherwise, RCU will
already be watching. Lockdep and tracing have to be updated unconditionally.

irqentry_enter() and irqentry_exit() provide the implementation for this.

The architecture-specific part looks similar to syscall handling:

.. code-block:: c

  noinstr void interrupt(struct pt_regs *regs, int nr)
  {
	arch_interrupt_enter(regs);
	state = irqentry_enter(regs);

	instrumentation_begin();

	irq_enter_rcu();
	invoke_irq_handler(regs, nr);
	irq_exit_rcu();

	instrumentation_end();

	irqentry_exit(regs, state);
  }

Note that the invocation of the actual interrupt handler is within a
irq_enter_rcu() and irq_exit_rcu() pair.

irq_enter_rcu() updates the preemption count which makes in_hardirq()
return true, handles NOHZ tick state and interrupt time accounting. This
means that up to the point where irq_enter_rcu() is invoked in_hardirq()
returns false.

irq_exit_rcu() handles interrupt time accounting, undoes the preemption
count update and eventually handles soft interrupts and NOHZ tick state.

In theory, the preemption count could be updated in irqentry_enter(). In
practice, deferring this update to irq_enter_rcu() allows the preemption-count
code to be traced, while also maintaining symmetry with irq_exit_rcu() and
irqentry_exit(), which are described in the next paragraph. The only downside
is that the early entry code up to irq_enter_rcu() must be aware that the
preemption count has not yet been updated with the HARDIRQ_OFFSET state.

Note that irq_exit_rcu() must remove HARDIRQ_OFFSET from the preemption count
before it handles soft interrupts, whose handlers must run in BH context rather
than irq-disabled context. In addition, irqentry_exit() might schedule, which
also requires that HARDIRQ_OFFSET has been removed from the preemption count.

Even though interrupt handlers are expected to run with local interrupts
disabled, interrupt nesting is common from an entry/exit perspective. For
example, softirq handling happens within an irqentry_{enter,exit}() block with
local interrupts enabled. Also, although uncommon, nothing prevents an
interrupt handler from re-enabling interrupts.

Interrupt entry/exit code doesn't strictly need to handle reentrancy, since it
runs with local interrupts disabled. But NMIs can happen anytime, and a lot of
the entry code is shared between the two.

NMI and NMI-like exceptions
---------------------------

NMIs and NMI-like exceptions (machine checks, double faults, debug
interrupts, etc.) can hit any context and must be extra careful with
the state.

State changes for debug exceptions and machine-check exceptions depend on
whether these exceptions happened in user-space (breakpoints or watchpoints) or
in kernel mode (code patching). From user-space, they are treated like
interrupts, while from kernel mode they are treated like NMIs.

NMIs and other NMI-like exceptions handle state transitions without
distinguishing between user-mode and kernel-mode origin.

The state update on entry is handled in irqentry_nmi_enter() which updates
state in the following order:

  * Preemption counter
  * Lockdep
  * RCU / Context tracking
  * Tracing

The exit counterpart irqentry_nmi_exit() does the reverse operation in the
reverse order.

Note that the update of the preemption counter has to be the first
operation on enter and the last operation on exit. The reason is that both
lockdep and RCU rely on in_nmi() returning true in this case. The
preemption count modification in the NMI entry/exit case must not be
traced.

Architecture-specific code looks like this:

.. code-block:: c

  noinstr void nmi(struct pt_regs *regs)
  {
	arch_nmi_enter(regs);
	state = irqentry_nmi_enter(regs);

	instrumentation_begin();
	nmi_handler(regs);
	instrumentation_end();

	irqentry_nmi_exit(regs);
  }

and for e.g. a debug exception it can look like this:

.. code-block:: c

  noinstr void debug(struct pt_regs *regs)
  {
	arch_nmi_enter(regs);

	debug_regs = save_debug_regs();

	if (user_mode(regs)) {
		state = irqentry_enter(regs);

		instrumentation_begin();
		user_mode_debug_handler(regs, debug_regs);
		instrumentation_end();

		irqentry_exit(regs, state);
  	} else {
  		state = irqentry_nmi_enter(regs);

		instrumentation_begin();
		kernel_mode_debug_handler(regs, debug_regs);
		instrumentation_end();

		irqentry_nmi_exit(regs, state);
	}
  }

There is no combined irqentry_nmi_if_kernel() function available as the
above cannot be handled in an exception-agnostic way.

NMIs can happen in any context. For example, an NMI-like exception triggered
while handling an NMI. So NMI entry code has to be reentrant and state updates
need to handle nesting.
=====================
The errseq_t datatype
=====================

An errseq_t is a way of recording errors in one place, and allowing any
number of "subscribers" to tell whether it has changed since a previous
point where it was sampled.

The initial use case for this is tracking errors for file
synchronization syscalls (fsync, fdatasync, msync and sync_file_range),
but it may be usable in other situations.

It's implemented as an unsigned 32-bit value.  The low order bits are
designated to hold an error code (between 1 and MAX_ERRNO).  The upper bits
are used as a counter.  This is done with atomics instead of locking so that
these functions can be called from any context.

Note that there is a risk of collisions if new errors are being recorded
frequently, since we have so few bits to use as a counter.

To mitigate this, the bit between the error value and counter is used as
a flag to tell whether the value has been sampled since a new value was
recorded.  That allows us to avoid bumping the counter if no one has
sampled it since the last time an error was recorded.

Thus we end up with a value that looks something like this:

+--------------------------------------+----+------------------------+
| 31..13                               | 12 | 11..0                  |
+--------------------------------------+----+------------------------+
| counter                              | SF | errno                  |
+--------------------------------------+----+------------------------+

The general idea is for "watchers" to sample an errseq_t value and keep
it as a running cursor.  That value can later be used to tell whether
any new errors have occurred since that sampling was done, and atomically
record the state at the time that it was checked.  This allows us to
record errors in one place, and then have a number of "watchers" that
can tell whether the value has changed since they last checked it.

A new errseq_t should always be zeroed out.  An errseq_t value of all zeroes
is the special (but common) case where there has never been an error. An all
zero value thus serves as the "epoch" if one wishes to know whether there
has ever been an error set since it was first initialized.

API usage
=========

Let me tell you a story about a worker drone.  Now, he's a good worker
overall, but the company is a little...management heavy.  He has to
report to 77 supervisors today, and tomorrow the "big boss" is coming in
from out of town and he's sure to test the poor fellow too.

They're all handing him work to do -- so much he can't keep track of who
handed him what, but that's not really a big problem.  The supervisors
just want to know when he's finished all of the work they've handed him so
far and whether he made any mistakes since they last asked.

He might have made the mistake on work they didn't actually hand him,
but he can't keep track of things at that level of detail, all he can
remember is the most recent mistake that he made.

Here's our worker_drone representation::

        struct worker_drone {
                errseq_t        wd_err; /* for recording errors */
        };

Every day, the worker_drone starts out with a blank slate::

        struct worker_drone wd;

        wd.wd_err = (errseq_t)0;

The supervisors come in and get an initial read for the day.  They
don't care about anything that happened before their watch begins::

        struct supervisor {
                errseq_t        s_wd_err; /* private "cursor" for wd_err */
                spinlock_t      s_wd_err_lock; /* protects s_wd_err */
        }

        struct supervisor       su;

        su.s_wd_err = errseq_sample(&wd.wd_err);
        spin_lock_init(&su.s_wd_err_lock);

Now they start handing him tasks to do.  Every few minutes they ask him to
finish up all of the work they've handed him so far.  Then they ask him
whether he made any mistakes on any of it::

        spin_lock(&su.su_wd_err_lock);
        err = errseq_check_and_advance(&wd.wd_err, &su.s_wd_err);
        spin_unlock(&su.su_wd_err_lock);

Up to this point, that just keeps returning 0.

Now, the owners of this company are quite miserly and have given him
substandard equipment with which to do his job. Occasionally it
glitches and he makes a mistake.  He sighs a heavy sigh, and marks it
down::

        errseq_set(&wd.wd_err, -EIO);

...and then gets back to work.  The supervisors eventually poll again
and they each get the error when they next check.  Subsequent calls will
return 0, until another error is recorded, at which point it's reported
to each of them once.

Note that the supervisors can't tell how many mistakes he made, only
whether one was made since they last checked, and the latest value
recorded.

Occasionally the big boss comes in for a spot check and asks the worker
to do a one-off job for him. He's not really watching the worker
full-time like the supervisors, but he does need to know whether a
mistake occurred while his job was processing.

He can just sample the current errseq_t in the worker, and then use that
to tell whether an error has occurred later::

        errseq_t since = errseq_sample(&wd.wd_err);
        /* submit some work and wait for it to complete */
        err = errseq_check(&wd.wd_err, since);

Since he's just going to discard "since" after that point, he doesn't
need to advance it here. He also doesn't need any locking since it's
not usable by anyone else.

Serializing errseq_t cursor updates
===================================

Note that the errseq_t API does not protect the errseq_t cursor during a
check_and_advance_operation. Only the canonical error code is handled
atomically.  In a situation where more than one task might be using the
same errseq_t cursor at the same time, it's important to serialize
updates to that cursor.

If that's not done, then it's possible for the cursor to go backward
in which case the same error could be reported more than once.

Because of this, it's often advantageous to first do an errseq_check to
see if anything has changed, and only later do an
errseq_check_and_advance after taking the lock. e.g.::

        if (errseq_check(&wd.wd_err, READ_ONCE(su.s_wd_err)) {
                /* su.s_wd_err is protected by s_wd_err_lock */
                spin_lock(&su.s_wd_err_lock);
                err = errseq_check_and_advance(&wd.wd_err, &su.s_wd_err);
                spin_unlock(&su.s_wd_err_lock);
        }

That avoids the spinlock in the common case where nothing has changed
since the last time it was checked.

Functions
=========

.. kernel-doc:: lib/errseq.c
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+

Floating-point API
==================

Kernel code is normally prohibited from using floating-point (FP) registers or
instructions, including the C float and double data types. This rule reduces
system call overhead, because the kernel does not need to save and restore the
userspace floating-point register state.

However, occasionally drivers or library functions may need to include FP code.
This is supported by isolating the functions containing FP code to a separate
translation unit (a separate source file), and saving/restoring the FP register
state around calls to those functions. This creates "critical sections" of
floating-point usage.

The reason for this isolation is to prevent the compiler from generating code
touching the FP registers outside these critical sections. Compilers sometimes
use FP registers to optimize inlined ``memcpy`` or variable assignment, as
floating-point registers may be wider than general-purpose registers.

Usability of floating-point code within the kernel is architecture-specific.
Additionally, because a single kernel may be configured to support platforms
both with and without a floating-point unit, FPU availability must be checked
both at build time and at run time.

Several architectures implement the generic kernel floating-point API from
``linux/fpu.h``, as described below. Some other architectures implement their
own unique APIs, which are documented separately.

Build-time API
--------------

Floating-point code may be built if the option ``ARCH_HAS_KERNEL_FPU_SUPPORT``
is enabled. For C code, such code must be placed in a separate file, and that
file must have its compilation flags adjusted using the following pattern::

    CFLAGS_foo.o += $(CC_FLAGS_FPU)
    CFLAGS_REMOVE_foo.o += $(CC_FLAGS_NO_FPU)

Architectures are expected to define one or both of these variables in their
top-level Makefile as needed. For example::

    CC_FLAGS_FPU := -mhard-float

or::

    CC_FLAGS_NO_FPU := -msoft-float

Normal kernel code is assumed to use the equivalent of ``CC_FLAGS_NO_FPU``.

Runtime API
-----------

The runtime API is provided in ``linux/fpu.h``. This header cannot be included
from files implementing FP code (those with their compilation flags adjusted as
above). Instead, it must be included when defining the FP critical sections.

.. c:function:: bool kernel_fpu_available( void )

        This function reports if floating-point code can be used on this CPU or
        platform. The value returned by this function is not expected to change
        at runtime, so it only needs to be called once, not before every
        critical section.

.. c:function:: void kernel_fpu_begin( void )
                void kernel_fpu_end( void )

        These functions create a floating-point critical section. It is only
        valid to call ``kernel_fpu_begin()`` after a previous call to
        ``kernel_fpu_available()`` returned ``true``. These functions are only
        guaranteed to be callable from (preemptible or non-preemptible) process
        context.

        Preemption may be disabled inside critical sections, so their size
        should be minimized. They are *not* required to be reentrant. If the
        caller expects to nest critical sections, it must implement its own
        reference counting.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+

===========
Folio Queue
===========

:Author: David Howells <dhowells@redhat.com>

.. Contents:

 * Overview
 * Initialisation
 * Adding and removing folios
 * Querying information about a folio
 * Querying information about a folio_queue
 * Folio queue iteration
 * Folio marks
 * Lockless simultaneous production/consumption issues


Overview
========

The folio_queue struct forms a single segment in a segmented list of folios
that can be used to form an I/O buffer.  As such, the list can be iterated over
using the ITER_FOLIOQ iov_iter type.

The publicly accessible members of the structure are::

	struct folio_queue {
		struct folio_queue *next;
		struct folio_queue *prev;
		...
	};

A pair of pointers are provided, ``next`` and ``prev``, that point to the
segments on either side of the segment being accessed.  Whilst this is a
doubly-linked list, it is intentionally not a circular list; the outward
sibling pointers in terminal segments should be NULL.

Each segment in the list also stores:

 * an ordered sequence of folio pointers,
 * the size of each folio and
 * three 1-bit marks per folio,

but hese should not be accessed directly as the underlying data structure may
change, but rather the access functions outlined below should be used.

The facility can be made accessible by::

	#include <linux/folio_queue.h>

and to use the iterator::

	#include <linux/uio.h>


Initialisation
==============

A segment should be initialised by calling::

	void folioq_init(struct folio_queue *folioq);

with a pointer to the segment to be initialised.  Note that this will not
necessarily initialise all the folio pointers, so care must be taken to check
the number of folios added.


Adding and removing folios
==========================

Folios can be set in the next unused slot in a segment struct by calling one
of::

	unsigned int folioq_append(struct folio_queue *folioq,
				   struct folio *folio);

	unsigned int folioq_append_mark(struct folio_queue *folioq,
					struct folio *folio);

Both functions update the stored folio count, store the folio and note its
size.  The second function also sets the first mark for the folio added.  Both
functions return the number of the slot used.  [!] Note that no attempt is made
to check that the capacity wasn't overrun and the list will not be extended
automatically.

A folio can be excised by calling::

	void folioq_clear(struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);

This clears the slot in the array and also clears all the marks for that folio,
but doesn't change the folio count - so future accesses of that slot must check
if the slot is occupied.


Querying information about a folio
==================================

Information about the folio in a particular slot may be queried by the
following function::

	struct folio *folioq_folio(const struct folio_queue *folioq,
				   unsigned int slot);

If a folio has not yet been set in that slot, this may yield an undefined
pointer.  The size of the folio in a slot may be queried with either of::

	unsigned int folioq_folio_order(const struct folio_queue *folioq,
					unsigned int slot);

	size_t folioq_folio_size(const struct folio_queue *folioq,
				 unsigned int slot);

The first function returns the size as an order and the second as a number of
bytes.


Querying information about a folio_queue
========================================

Information may be retrieved about a particular segment with the following
functions::

	unsigned int folioq_nr_slots(const struct folio_queue *folioq);

	unsigned int folioq_count(struct folio_queue *folioq);

	bool folioq_full(struct folio_queue *folioq);

The first function returns the maximum capacity of a segment.  It must not be
assumed that this won't vary between segments.  The second returns the number
of folios added to a segments and the third is a shorthand to indicate if the
segment has been filled to capacity.

Not that the count and fullness are not affected by clearing folios from the
segment.  These are more about indicating how many slots in the array have been
initialised, and it assumed that slots won't get reused, but rather the segment
will get discarded as the queue is consumed.


Folio marks
===========

Folios within a queue can also have marks assigned to them.  These marks can be
used to note information such as if a folio needs folio_put() calling upon it.
There are three marks available to be set for each folio.

The marks can be set by::

	void folioq_mark(struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);
	void folioq_mark2(struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);
	void folioq_mark3(struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);

Cleared by::

	void folioq_unmark(struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);
	void folioq_unmark2(struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);
	void folioq_unmark3(struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);

And the marks can be queried by::

	bool folioq_is_marked(const struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);
	bool folioq_is_marked2(const struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);
	bool folioq_is_marked3(const struct folio_queue *folioq, unsigned int slot);

The marks can be used for any purpose and are not interpreted by this API.


Folio queue iteration
=====================

A list of segments may be iterated over using the I/O iterator facility using
an ``iov_iter`` iterator of ``ITER_FOLIOQ`` type.  The iterator may be
initialised with::

	void iov_iter_folio_queue(struct iov_iter *i, unsigned int direction,
				  const struct folio_queue *folioq,
				  unsigned int first_slot, unsigned int offset,
				  size_t count);

This may be told to start at a particular segment, slot and offset within a
queue.  The iov iterator functions will follow the next pointers when advancing
and prev pointers when reverting when needed.


Lockless simultaneous production/consumption issues
===================================================

If properly managed, the list can be extended by the producer at the head end
and shortened by the consumer at the tail end simultaneously without the need
to take locks.  The ITER_FOLIOQ iterator inserts appropriate barriers to aid
with this.

Care must be taken when simultaneously producing and consuming a list.  If the
last segment is reached and the folios it refers to are entirely consumed by
the IOV iterators, an iov_iter struct will be left pointing to the last segment
with a slot number equal to the capacity of that segment.  The iterator will
try to continue on from this if there's another segment available when it is
used again, but care must be taken lest the segment got removed and freed by
the consumer before the iterator was advanced.

It is recommended that the queue always contain at least one segment, even if
that segment has never been filled or is entirely spent.  This prevents the
head and tail pointers from collapsing.


API Function Reference
======================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/folio_queue.h
The genalloc/genpool subsystem
==============================

There are a number of memory-allocation subsystems in the kernel, each
aimed at a specific need.  Sometimes, however, a kernel developer needs to
implement a new allocator for a specific range of special-purpose memory;
often that memory is located on a device somewhere.  The author of the
driver for that device can certainly write a little allocator to get the
job done, but that is the way to fill the kernel with dozens of poorly
tested allocators.  Back in 2005, Jes Sorensen lifted one of those
allocators from the sym53c8xx_2 driver and posted_ it as a generic module
for the creation of ad hoc memory allocators.  This code was merged
for the 2.6.13 release; it has been modified considerably since then.

.. _posted: https://lwn.net/Articles/125842/

Code using this allocator should include <linux/genalloc.h>.  The action
begins with the creation of a pool using one of:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_create		

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: devm_gen_pool_create

A call to gen_pool_create() will create a pool.  The granularity of
allocations is set with min_alloc_order; it is a log-base-2 number like
those used by the page allocator, but it refers to bytes rather than pages.
So, if min_alloc_order is passed as 3, then all allocations will be a
multiple of eight bytes.  Increasing min_alloc_order decreases the memory
required to track the memory in the pool.  The nid parameter specifies
which NUMA node should be used for the allocation of the housekeeping
structures; it can be -1 if the caller doesn't care.

The "managed" interface devm_gen_pool_create() ties the pool to a
specific device.  Among other things, it will automatically clean up the
pool when the given device is destroyed.

A pool is shut down with:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_destroy

It's worth noting that, if there are still allocations outstanding from the
given pool, this function will take the rather extreme step of invoking
BUG(), crashing the entire system.  You have been warned.

A freshly created pool has no memory to allocate.  It is fairly useless in
that state, so one of the first orders of business is usually to add memory
to the pool.  That can be done with one of:

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/genalloc.h
   :functions: gen_pool_add

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_add_owner

A call to gen_pool_add() will place the size bytes of memory
starting at addr (in the kernel's virtual address space) into the given
pool, once again using nid as the node ID for ancillary memory allocations.
The gen_pool_add_virt() variant associates an explicit physical
address with the memory; this is only necessary if the pool will be used
for DMA allocations.

The functions for allocating memory from the pool (and putting it back)
are:

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/genalloc.h
   :functions: gen_pool_alloc

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_dma_alloc

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_free_owner

As one would expect, gen_pool_alloc() will allocate size< bytes
from the given pool.  The gen_pool_dma_alloc() variant allocates
memory for use with DMA operations, returning the associated physical
address in the space pointed to by dma.  This will only work if the memory
was added with gen_pool_add_virt().  Note that this function
departs from the usual genpool pattern of using unsigned long values to
represent kernel addresses; it returns a void * instead.

That all seems relatively simple; indeed, some developers clearly found it
to be too simple.  After all, the interface above provides no control over
how the allocation functions choose which specific piece of memory to
return.  If that sort of control is needed, the following functions will be
of interest:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_alloc_algo_owner

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_set_algo

Allocations with gen_pool_alloc_algo() specify an algorithm to be
used to choose the memory to be allocated; the default algorithm can be set
with gen_pool_set_algo().  The data value is passed to the
algorithm; most ignore it, but it is occasionally needed.  One can,
naturally, write a special-purpose algorithm, but there is a fair set
already available:

- gen_pool_first_fit is a simple first-fit allocator; this is the default
  algorithm if none other has been specified.

- gen_pool_first_fit_align forces the allocation to have a specific
  alignment (passed via data in a genpool_data_align structure).

- gen_pool_first_fit_order_align aligns the allocation to the order of the
  size.  A 60-byte allocation will thus be 64-byte aligned, for example.

- gen_pool_best_fit, as one would expect, is a simple best-fit allocator.

- gen_pool_fixed_alloc allocates at a specific offset (passed in a
  genpool_data_fixed structure via the data parameter) within the pool.
  If the indicated memory is not available the allocation fails.

There is a handful of other functions, mostly for purposes like querying
the space available in the pool or iterating through chunks of memory.
Most users, however, should not need much beyond what has been described
above.  With luck, wider awareness of this module will help to prevent the
writing of special-purpose memory allocators in the future.

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_virt_to_phys

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_for_each_chunk

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_has_addr

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_avail

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_size

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: gen_pool_get

.. kernel-doc:: lib/genalloc.c
   :functions: of_gen_pool_get
=================================
Generic radix trees/sparse arrays
=================================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/generic-radix-tree.h
   :doc: Generic radix trees/sparse arrays

generic radix tree functions
----------------------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/generic-radix-tree.h
   :functions:
.. include:: <isonum.txt>

==========================
Linux generic IRQ handling
==========================

:Copyright: |copy| 2005-2010: Thomas Gleixner
:Copyright: |copy| 2005-2006:  Ingo Molnar

Introduction
============

The generic interrupt handling layer is designed to provide a complete
abstraction of interrupt handling for device drivers. It is able to
handle all the different types of interrupt controller hardware. Device
drivers use generic API functions to request, enable, disable and free
interrupts. The drivers do not have to know anything about interrupt
hardware details, so they can be used on different platforms without
code changes.

This documentation is provided to developers who want to implement an
interrupt subsystem based for their architecture, with the help of the
generic IRQ handling layer.

Rationale
=========

The original implementation of interrupt handling in Linux uses the
__do_IRQ() super-handler, which is able to deal with every type of
interrupt logic.

Originally, Russell King identified different types of handlers to build
a quite universal set for the ARM interrupt handler implementation in
Linux 2.5/2.6. He distinguished between:

-  Level type

-  Edge type

-  Simple type

During the implementation we identified another type:

-  Fast EOI type

In the SMP world of the __do_IRQ() super-handler another type was
identified:

-  Per CPU type

This split implementation of high-level IRQ handlers allows us to
optimize the flow of the interrupt handling for each specific interrupt
type. This reduces complexity in that particular code path and allows
the optimized handling of a given type.

The original general IRQ implementation used hw_interrupt_type
structures and their ``->ack``, ``->end`` [etc.] callbacks to differentiate
the flow control in the super-handler. This leads to a mix of flow logic
and low-level hardware logic, and it also leads to unnecessary code
duplication: for example in i386, there is an ``ioapic_level_irq`` and an
``ioapic_edge_irq`` IRQ-type which share many of the low-level details but
have different flow handling.

A more natural abstraction is the clean separation of the 'irq flow' and
the 'chip details'.

Analysing a couple of architecture's IRQ subsystem implementations
reveals that most of them can use a generic set of 'irq flow' methods
and only need to add the chip-level specific code. The separation is
also valuable for (sub)architectures which need specific quirks in the
IRQ flow itself but not in the chip details - and thus provides a more
transparent IRQ subsystem design.

Each interrupt descriptor is assigned its own high-level flow handler,
which is normally one of the generic implementations. (This high-level
flow handler implementation also makes it simple to provide
demultiplexing handlers which can be found in embedded platforms on
various architectures.)

The separation makes the generic interrupt handling layer more flexible
and extensible. For example, an (sub)architecture can use a generic
IRQ-flow implementation for 'level type' interrupts and add a
(sub)architecture specific 'edge type' implementation.

To make the transition to the new model easier and prevent the breakage
of existing implementations, the __do_IRQ() super-handler is still
available. This leads to a kind of duality for the time being. Over time
the new model should be used in more and more architectures, as it
enables smaller and cleaner IRQ subsystems. It's deprecated for three
years now and about to be removed.

Known Bugs And Assumptions
==========================

None (knock on wood).

Abstraction layers
==================

There are three main levels of abstraction in the interrupt code:

1. High-level driver API

2. High-level IRQ flow handlers

3. Chip-level hardware encapsulation

Interrupt control flow
----------------------

Each interrupt is described by an interrupt descriptor structure
irq_desc. The interrupt is referenced by an 'unsigned int' numeric
value which selects the corresponding interrupt description structure in
the descriptor structures array. The descriptor structure contains
status information and pointers to the interrupt flow method and the
interrupt chip structure which are assigned to this interrupt.

Whenever an interrupt triggers, the low-level architecture code calls
into the generic interrupt code by calling desc->handle_irq(). This
high-level IRQ handling function only uses desc->irq_data.chip
primitives referenced by the assigned chip descriptor structure.

High-level Driver API
---------------------

The high-level Driver API consists of following functions:

-  request_irq()

-  request_threaded_irq()

-  free_irq()

-  disable_irq()

-  enable_irq()

-  disable_irq_nosync() (SMP only)

-  synchronize_irq() (SMP only)

-  irq_set_irq_type()

-  irq_set_irq_wake()

-  irq_set_handler_data()

-  irq_set_chip()

-  irq_set_chip_data()

See the autogenerated function documentation for details.

High-level IRQ flow handlers
----------------------------

The generic layer provides a set of pre-defined irq-flow methods:

-  handle_level_irq()

-  handle_edge_irq()

-  handle_fasteoi_irq()

-  handle_simple_irq()

-  handle_percpu_irq()

-  handle_edge_eoi_irq()

-  handle_bad_irq()

The interrupt flow handlers (either pre-defined or architecture
specific) are assigned to specific interrupts by the architecture either
during bootup or during device initialization.

Default flow implementations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Helper functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The helper functions call the chip primitives and are used by the
default flow implementations. The following helper functions are
implemented (simplified excerpt)::

    default_enable(struct irq_data *data)
    {
        desc->irq_data.chip->irq_unmask(data);
    }

    default_disable(struct irq_data *data)
    {
        if (!delay_disable(data))
            desc->irq_data.chip->irq_mask(data);
    }

    default_ack(struct irq_data *data)
    {
        chip->irq_ack(data);
    }

    default_mask_ack(struct irq_data *data)
    {
        if (chip->irq_mask_ack) {
            chip->irq_mask_ack(data);
        } else {
            chip->irq_mask(data);
            chip->irq_ack(data);
        }
    }

    noop(struct irq_data *data)
    {
    }



Default flow handler implementations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Default Level IRQ flow handler
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

handle_level_irq provides a generic implementation for level-triggered
interrupts.

The following control flow is implemented (simplified excerpt)::

    desc->irq_data.chip->irq_mask_ack();
    handle_irq_event(desc->action);
    desc->irq_data.chip->irq_unmask();


Default Fast EOI IRQ flow handler
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

handle_fasteoi_irq provides a generic implementation for interrupts,
which only need an EOI at the end of the handler.

The following control flow is implemented (simplified excerpt)::

    handle_irq_event(desc->action);
    desc->irq_data.chip->irq_eoi();


Default Edge IRQ flow handler
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

handle_edge_irq provides a generic implementation for edge-triggered
interrupts.

The following control flow is implemented (simplified excerpt)::

    if (desc->status & running) {
        desc->irq_data.chip->irq_mask_ack();
        desc->status |= pending | masked;
        return;
    }
    desc->irq_data.chip->irq_ack();
    desc->status |= running;
    do {
        if (desc->status & masked)
            desc->irq_data.chip->irq_unmask();
        desc->status &= ~pending;
        handle_irq_event(desc->action);
    } while (desc->status & pending);
    desc->status &= ~running;


Default simple IRQ flow handler
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

handle_simple_irq provides a generic implementation for simple
interrupts.

.. note::

   The simple flow handler does not call any handler/chip primitives.

The following control flow is implemented (simplified excerpt)::

    handle_irq_event(desc->action);


Default per CPU flow handler
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

handle_percpu_irq provides a generic implementation for per CPU
interrupts.

Per CPU interrupts are only available on SMP and the handler provides a
simplified version without locking.

The following control flow is implemented (simplified excerpt)::

    if (desc->irq_data.chip->irq_ack)
        desc->irq_data.chip->irq_ack();
    handle_irq_event(desc->action);
    if (desc->irq_data.chip->irq_eoi)
        desc->irq_data.chip->irq_eoi();


EOI Edge IRQ flow handler
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

handle_edge_eoi_irq provides an abnomination of the edge handler
which is solely used to tame a badly wreckaged irq controller on
powerpc/cell.

Bad IRQ flow handler
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

handle_bad_irq is used for spurious interrupts which have no real
handler assigned..

Quirks and optimizations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The generic functions are intended for 'clean' architectures and chips,
which have no platform-specific IRQ handling quirks. If an architecture
needs to implement quirks on the 'flow' level then it can do so by
overriding the high-level irq-flow handler.

Delayed interrupt disable
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This per interrupt selectable feature, which was introduced by Russell
King in the ARM interrupt implementation, does not mask an interrupt at
the hardware level when disable_irq() is called. The interrupt is kept
enabled and is masked in the flow handler when an interrupt event
happens. This prevents losing edge interrupts on hardware which does not
store an edge interrupt event while the interrupt is disabled at the
hardware level. When an interrupt arrives while the IRQ_DISABLED flag
is set, then the interrupt is masked at the hardware level and the
IRQ_PENDING bit is set. When the interrupt is re-enabled by
enable_irq() the pending bit is checked and if it is set, the interrupt
is resent either via hardware or by a software resend mechanism. (It's
necessary to enable CONFIG_HARDIRQS_SW_RESEND when you want to use
the delayed interrupt disable feature and your hardware is not capable
of retriggering an interrupt.) The delayed interrupt disable is not
configurable.

Chip-level hardware encapsulation
---------------------------------

The chip-level hardware descriptor structure :c:type:`irq_chip` contains all
the direct chip relevant functions, which can be utilized by the irq flow
implementations.

-  ``irq_ack``

-  ``irq_mask_ack`` - Optional, recommended for performance

-  ``irq_mask``

-  ``irq_unmask``

-  ``irq_eoi`` - Optional, required for EOI flow handlers

-  ``irq_retrigger`` - Optional

-  ``irq_set_type`` - Optional

-  ``irq_set_wake`` - Optional

These primitives are strictly intended to mean what they say: ack means
ACK, masking means masking of an IRQ line, etc. It is up to the flow
handler(s) to use these basic units of low-level functionality.

__do_IRQ entry point
====================

The original implementation __do_IRQ() was an alternative entry point
for all types of interrupts. It no longer exists.

This handler turned out to be not suitable for all interrupt hardware
and was therefore reimplemented with split functionality for
edge/level/simple/percpu interrupts. This is not only a functional
optimization. It also shortens code paths for interrupts.

Locking on SMP
==============

The locking of chip registers is up to the architecture that defines the
chip primitives. The per-irq structure is protected via desc->lock, by
the generic layer.

Generic interrupt chip
======================

To avoid copies of identical implementations of IRQ chips the core
provides a configurable generic interrupt chip implementation.
Developers should check carefully whether the generic chip fits their
needs before implementing the same functionality slightly differently
themselves.

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/irq/generic-chip.c
   :export:

Structures
==========

This chapter contains the autogenerated documentation of the structures
which are used in the generic IRQ layer.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/irq.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/interrupt.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/irqdomain.h

Public Functions Provided
=========================

This chapter contains the autogenerated documentation of the kernel API
functions which are exported.

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/irq/manage.c

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/irq/chip.c
   :export:

Internal Functions Provided
===========================

This chapter contains the autogenerated documentation of the internal
functions.

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/irq/irqdesc.c

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/irq/handle.c

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/irq/chip.c
   :internal:

Credits
=======

The following people have contributed to this document:

1. Thomas Gleixner tglx@linutronix.de

2. Ingo Molnar mingo@elte.hu
.. _gfp_mask_from_fs_io:

=================================
GFP masks used from FS/IO context
=================================

:Date: May, 2018
:Author: Michal Hocko <mhocko@kernel.org>

Introduction
============

Code paths in the filesystem and IO stacks must be careful when
allocating memory to prevent recursion deadlocks caused by direct
memory reclaim calling back into the FS or IO paths and blocking on
already held resources (e.g. locks - most commonly those used for the
transaction context).

The traditional way to avoid this deadlock problem is to clear __GFP_FS
respectively __GFP_IO (note the latter implies clearing the first as well) in
the gfp mask when calling an allocator. GFP_NOFS respectively GFP_NOIO can be
used as shortcut. It turned out though that above approach has led to
abuses when the restricted gfp mask is used "just in case" without a
deeper consideration which leads to problems because an excessive use
of GFP_NOFS/GFP_NOIO can lead to memory over-reclaim or other memory
reclaim issues.

New API
========

Since 4.12 we do have a generic scope API for both NOFS and NOIO context
``memalloc_nofs_save``, ``memalloc_nofs_restore`` respectively ``memalloc_noio_save``,
``memalloc_noio_restore`` which allow to mark a scope to be a critical
section from a filesystem or I/O point of view. Any allocation from that
scope will inherently drop __GFP_FS respectively __GFP_IO from the given
mask so no memory allocation can recurse back in the FS/IO.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/sched/mm.h
   :functions: memalloc_nofs_save memalloc_nofs_restore
.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/sched/mm.h
   :functions: memalloc_noio_save memalloc_noio_restore

FS/IO code then simply calls the appropriate save function before
any critical section with respect to the reclaim is started - e.g.
lock shared with the reclaim context or when a transaction context
nesting would be possible via reclaim. The restore function should be
called when the critical section ends. All that ideally along with an
explanation what is the reclaim context for easier maintenance.

Please note that the proper pairing of save/restore functions
allows nesting so it is safe to call ``memalloc_noio_save`` or
``memalloc_noio_restore`` respectively from an existing NOIO or NOFS
scope.

What about __vmalloc(GFP_NOFS)
==============================

vmalloc doesn't support GFP_NOFS semantic because there are hardcoded
GFP_KERNEL allocations deep inside the allocator which are quite non-trivial
to fix up. That means that calling ``vmalloc`` with GFP_NOFS/GFP_NOIO is
almost always a bug. The good news is that the NOFS/NOIO semantic can be
achieved by the scope API.

In the ideal world, upper layers should already mark dangerous contexts
and so no special care is required and vmalloc should be called without
any problems. Sometimes if the context is not really clear or there are
layering violations then the recommended way around that is to wrap ``vmalloc``
by the scope API with a comment explaining the problem.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+

=============
ID Allocation
=============

:Author: Matthew Wilcox

Overview
========

A common problem to solve is allocating identifiers (IDs); generally
small numbers which identify a thing.  Examples include file descriptors,
process IDs, packet identifiers in networking protocols, SCSI tags
and device instance numbers.  The IDR and the IDA provide a reasonable
solution to the problem to avoid everybody inventing their own.  The IDR
provides the ability to map an ID to a pointer, while the IDA provides
only ID allocation, and as a result is much more memory-efficient.

The IDR interface is deprecated; please use the :doc:`XArray <xarray>`
instead.

IDR usage
=========

Start by initialising an IDR, either with DEFINE_IDR()
for statically allocated IDRs or idr_init() for dynamically
allocated IDRs.

You can call idr_alloc() to allocate an unused ID.  Look up
the pointer you associated with the ID by calling idr_find()
and free the ID by calling idr_remove().

If you need to change the pointer associated with an ID, you can call
idr_replace().  One common reason to do this is to reserve an
ID by passing a ``NULL`` pointer to the allocation function; initialise the
object with the reserved ID and finally insert the initialised object
into the IDR.

Some users need to allocate IDs larger than ``INT_MAX``.  So far all of
these users have been content with a ``UINT_MAX`` limit, and they use
idr_alloc_u32().  If you need IDs that will not fit in a u32,
we will work with you to address your needs.

If you need to allocate IDs sequentially, you can use
idr_alloc_cyclic().  The IDR becomes less efficient when dealing
with larger IDs, so using this function comes at a slight cost.

To perform an action on all pointers used by the IDR, you can
either use the callback-based idr_for_each() or the
iterator-style idr_for_each_entry().  You may need to use
idr_for_each_entry_continue() to continue an iteration.  You can
also use idr_get_next() if the iterator doesn't fit your needs.

When you have finished using an IDR, you can call idr_destroy()
to release the memory used by the IDR.  This will not free the objects
pointed to from the IDR; if you want to do that, use one of the iterators
to do it.

You can use idr_is_empty() to find out whether there are any
IDs currently allocated.

If you need to take a lock while allocating a new ID from the IDR,
you may need to pass a restrictive set of GFP flags, which can lead
to the IDR being unable to allocate memory.  To work around this,
you can call idr_preload() before taking the lock, and then
idr_preload_end() after the allocation.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/idr.h
   :doc: idr sync

IDA usage
=========

.. kernel-doc:: lib/idr.c
   :doc: IDA description

Functions and structures
========================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/idr.h
   :functions:
.. kernel-doc:: lib/idr.c
   :functions:
======================
Core API Documentation
======================

This is the beginning of a manual for core kernel APIs.  The conversion
(and writing!) of documents for this manual is much appreciated!

Core utilities
==============

This section has general and "core core" documentation.  The first is a
massive grab-bag of kerneldoc info left over from the docbook days; it
should really be broken up someday when somebody finds the energy to do
it.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   kernel-api
   workqueue
   watch_queue
   printk-basics
   printk-formats
   printk-index
   symbol-namespaces
   asm-annotations

Data structures and low-level utilities
=======================================

Library functionality that is used throughout the kernel.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   kobject
   kref
   cleanup
   assoc_array
   folio_queue
   xarray
   maple_tree
   idr
   circular-buffers
   rbtree
   generic-radix-tree
   packing
   this_cpu_ops
   timekeeping
   errseq
   wrappers/atomic_t
   wrappers/atomic_bitops
   floating-point
   union_find

Low level entry and exit
========================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   entry

Concurrency primitives
======================

How Linux keeps everything from happening at the same time.  See
Documentation/locking/index.rst for more related documentation.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   refcount-vs-atomic
   irq/index
   local_ops
   padata
   ../RCU/index
   wrappers/memory-barriers.rst

Low-level hardware management
=============================

Cache management, managing CPU hotplug, etc.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   cachetlb
   cpu_hotplug
   memory-hotplug
   genericirq
   protection-keys

Memory management
=================

How to allocate and use memory in the kernel.  Note that there is a lot
more memory-management documentation in Documentation/mm/index.rst.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   memory-allocation
   unaligned-memory-access
   dma-api
   dma-api-howto
   dma-attributes
   dma-isa-lpc
   swiotlb
   mm-api
   genalloc
   pin_user_pages
   boot-time-mm
   gfp_mask-from-fs-io

Interfaces for kernel debugging
===============================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   debug-objects
   tracepoint
   debugging-via-ohci1394

Everything else
===============

Documents that don't fit elsewhere or which have yet to be categorized.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   librs
   netlink

.. only:: subproject and html

   Indices
   =======

   * :ref:`genindex`
====================
The Linux Kernel API
====================


List Management Functions
=========================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/list.h
   :internal:

Basic C Library Functions
=========================

When writing drivers, you cannot in general use routines which are from
the C Library. Some of the functions have been found generally useful
and they are listed below. The behaviour of these functions may vary
slightly from those defined by ANSI, and these deviations are noted in
the text.

String Conversions
------------------

.. kernel-doc:: lib/vsprintf.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/kstrtox.h
   :functions: kstrtol kstrtoul

.. kernel-doc:: lib/kstrtox.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/string_helpers.c
   :export:

String Manipulation
-------------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/fortify-string.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/string.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/string.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: mm/util.c
   :functions: kstrdup kstrdup_const kstrndup kmemdup kmemdup_nul memdup_user
               vmemdup_user strndup_user memdup_user_nul

Basic Kernel Library Functions
==============================

The Linux kernel provides more basic utility functions.

Bit Operations
--------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/asm-generic/bitops/instrumented-atomic.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: include/asm-generic/bitops/instrumented-non-atomic.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: include/asm-generic/bitops/instrumented-lock.h
   :internal:

Bitmap Operations
-----------------

.. kernel-doc:: lib/bitmap.c
   :doc: bitmap introduction

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/bitmap.h
   :doc: declare bitmap

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/bitmap.h
   :doc: bitmap overview

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/bitmap.h
   :doc: bitmap bitops

.. kernel-doc:: lib/bitmap.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/bitmap.c
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/bitmap.h
   :internal:

Command-line Parsing
--------------------

.. kernel-doc:: lib/cmdline.c
   :export:

Error Pointers
--------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/err.h
   :internal:

Sorting
-------

.. kernel-doc:: lib/sort.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/list_sort.c
   :export:

Text Searching
--------------

.. kernel-doc:: lib/textsearch.c
   :doc: ts_intro

.. kernel-doc:: lib/textsearch.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/textsearch.h
   :functions: textsearch_find textsearch_next \
               textsearch_get_pattern textsearch_get_pattern_len

CRC and Math Functions in Linux
===============================

Arithmetic Overflow Checking
----------------------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/overflow.h
   :internal:

CRC Functions
-------------

.. kernel-doc:: lib/crc4.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/crc7.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/crc8.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/crc16.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/crc32.c

.. kernel-doc:: lib/crc-ccitt.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/crc-itu-t.c
   :export:

Base 2 log and power Functions
------------------------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/log2.h
   :internal:

Integer log and power Functions
-------------------------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/int_log.h

.. kernel-doc:: lib/math/int_pow.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/math/int_sqrt.c
   :export:

Division Functions
------------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/asm-generic/div64.h
   :functions: do_div

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/math64.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: lib/math/gcd.c
   :export:

UUID/GUID
---------

.. kernel-doc:: lib/uuid.c
   :export:

Kernel IPC facilities
=====================

IPC utilities
-------------

.. kernel-doc:: ipc/util.c
   :internal:

FIFO Buffer
===========

kfifo interface
---------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/kfifo.h
   :internal:

relay interface support
=======================

Relay interface support is designed to provide an efficient mechanism
for tools and facilities to relay large amounts of data from kernel
space to user space.

relay interface
---------------

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/relay.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/relay.c
   :internal:

Module Support
==============

Kernel module auto-loading
--------------------------

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/module/kmod.c
   :export:

Module debugging
----------------

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/module/stats.c
   :doc: module debugging statistics overview

dup_failed_modules - tracks duplicate failed modules
****************************************************

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/module/stats.c
   :doc: dup_failed_modules - tracks duplicate failed modules

module statistics debugfs counters
**********************************

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/module/stats.c
   :doc: module statistics debugfs counters

Inter Module support
--------------------

Refer to the files in kernel/module/ for more information.

Hardware Interfaces
===================

DMA Channels
------------

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/dma.c
   :export:

Resources Management
--------------------

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/resource.c
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/resource.c
   :export:

MTRR Handling
-------------

.. kernel-doc:: arch/x86/kernel/cpu/mtrr/mtrr.c
   :export:

Security Framework
==================

.. kernel-doc:: security/security.c
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: security/inode.c
   :export:

Audit Interfaces
================

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/audit.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/auditsc.c
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/auditfilter.c
   :internal:

Accounting Framework
====================

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/acct.c
   :internal:

Block Devices
=============

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/bio.h
.. kernel-doc:: block/blk-core.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: block/blk-core.c
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: block/blk-map.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: block/blk-sysfs.c
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: block/blk-settings.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: block/blk-flush.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: block/blk-lib.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: block/blk-integrity.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/trace/blktrace.c
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: block/genhd.c
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: block/genhd.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: block/bdev.c
   :export:

Char devices
============

.. kernel-doc:: fs/char_dev.c
   :export:

Clock Framework
===============

The clock framework defines programming interfaces to support software
management of the system clock tree. This framework is widely used with
System-On-Chip (SOC) platforms to support power management and various
devices which may need custom clock rates. Note that these "clocks"
don't relate to timekeeping or real time clocks (RTCs), each of which
have separate frameworks. These :c:type:`struct clk <clk>`
instances may be used to manage for example a 96 MHz signal that is used
to shift bits into and out of peripherals or busses, or otherwise
trigger synchronous state machine transitions in system hardware.

Power management is supported by explicit software clock gating: unused
clocks are disabled, so the system doesn't waste power changing the
state of transistors that aren't in active use. On some systems this may
be backed by hardware clock gating, where clocks are gated without being
disabled in software. Sections of chips that are powered but not clocked
may be able to retain their last state. This low power state is often
called a *retention mode*. This mode still incurs leakage currents,
especially with finer circuit geometries, but for CMOS circuits power is
mostly used by clocked state changes.

Power-aware drivers only enable their clocks when the device they manage
is in active use. Also, system sleep states often differ according to
which clock domains are active: while a "standby" state may allow wakeup
from several active domains, a "mem" (suspend-to-RAM) state may require
a more wholesale shutdown of clocks derived from higher speed PLLs and
oscillators, limiting the number of possible wakeup event sources. A
driver's suspend method may need to be aware of system-specific clock
constraints on the target sleep state.

Some platforms support programmable clock generators. These can be used
by external chips of various kinds, such as other CPUs, multimedia
codecs, and devices with strict requirements for interface clocking.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/clk.h
   :internal:

Synchronization Primitives
==========================

Read-Copy Update (RCU)
----------------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rcupdate.h

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/rcu/tree.c

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/rcu/tree_exp.h

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/rcu/update.c

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/srcu.h

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/rcu/srcutree.c

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rculist_bl.h

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rculist.h

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rculist_nulls.h

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rcu_sync.h

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/rcu/sync.c

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/rcu/tasks.h

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/rcu/tree_stall.h

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rcupdate_trace.h

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rcupdate_wait.h

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rcuref.h

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rcutree.h
=====================================================================
Everything you never wanted to know about kobjects, ksets, and ktypes
=====================================================================

:Author: Greg Kroah-Hartman <gregkh@linuxfoundation.org>
:Last updated: December 19, 2007

Based on an original article by Jon Corbet for lwn.net written October 1,
2003 and located at https://lwn.net/Articles/51437/

Part of the difficulty in understanding the driver model - and the kobject
abstraction upon which it is built - is that there is no obvious starting
place. Dealing with kobjects requires understanding a few different types,
all of which make reference to each other. In an attempt to make things
easier, we'll take a multi-pass approach, starting with vague terms and
adding detail as we go. To that end, here are some quick definitions of
some terms we will be working with.

 - A kobject is an object of type struct kobject.  Kobjects have a name
   and a reference count.  A kobject also has a parent pointer (allowing
   objects to be arranged into hierarchies), a specific type, and,
   usually, a representation in the sysfs virtual filesystem.

   Kobjects are generally not interesting on their own; instead, they are
   usually embedded within some other structure which contains the stuff
   the code is really interested in.

   No structure should **EVER** have more than one kobject embedded within it.
   If it does, the reference counting for the object is sure to be messed
   up and incorrect, and your code will be buggy.  So do not do this.

 - A ktype is the type of object that embeds a kobject.  Every structure
   that embeds a kobject needs a corresponding ktype.  The ktype controls
   what happens to the kobject when it is created and destroyed.

 - A kset is a group of kobjects.  These kobjects can be of the same ktype
   or belong to different ktypes.  The kset is the basic container type for
   collections of kobjects. Ksets contain their own kobjects, but you can
   safely ignore that implementation detail as the kset core code handles
   this kobject automatically.

   When you see a sysfs directory full of other directories, generally each
   of those directories corresponds to a kobject in the same kset.

We'll look at how to create and manipulate all of these types. A bottom-up
approach will be taken, so we'll go back to kobjects.


Embedding kobjects
==================

It is rare for kernel code to create a standalone kobject, with one major
exception explained below.  Instead, kobjects are used to control access to
a larger, domain-specific object.  To this end, kobjects will be found
embedded in other structures.  If you are used to thinking of things in
object-oriented terms, kobjects can be seen as a top-level, abstract class
from which other classes are derived.  A kobject implements a set of
capabilities which are not particularly useful by themselves, but are
nice to have in other objects.  The C language does not allow for the
direct expression of inheritance, so other techniques - such as structure
embedding - must be used.

(As an aside, for those familiar with the kernel linked list implementation,
this is analogous as to how "list_head" structs are rarely useful on
their own, but are invariably found embedded in the larger objects of
interest.)

So, for example, the UIO code in ``drivers/uio/uio.c`` has a structure that
defines the memory region associated with a uio device::

    struct uio_map {
            struct kobject kobj;
            struct uio_mem *mem;
    };

If you have a struct uio_map structure, finding its embedded kobject is
just a matter of using the kobj member.  Code that works with kobjects will
often have the opposite problem, however: given a struct kobject pointer,
what is the pointer to the containing structure?  You must avoid tricks
(such as assuming that the kobject is at the beginning of the structure)
and, instead, use the container_of() macro, found in ``<linux/kernel.h>``::

    container_of(ptr, type, member)

where:

  * ``ptr`` is the pointer to the embedded kobject,
  * ``type`` is the type of the containing structure, and
  * ``member`` is the name of the structure field to which ``pointer`` points.

The return value from container_of() is a pointer to the corresponding
container type. So, for example, a pointer ``kp`` to a struct kobject
embedded **within** a struct uio_map could be converted to a pointer to the
**containing** uio_map structure with::

    struct uio_map *u_map = container_of(kp, struct uio_map, kobj);

For convenience, programmers often define a simple macro for **back-casting**
kobject pointers to the containing type.  Exactly this happens in the
earlier ``drivers/uio/uio.c``, as you can see here::

    struct uio_map {
            struct kobject kobj;
            struct uio_mem *mem;
    };

    #define to_map(map) container_of(map, struct uio_map, kobj)

where the macro argument "map" is a pointer to the struct kobject in
question.  That macro is subsequently invoked with::

    struct uio_map *map = to_map(kobj);


Initialization of kobjects
==========================

Code which creates a kobject must, of course, initialize that object. Some
of the internal fields are setup with a (mandatory) call to kobject_init()::

    void kobject_init(struct kobject *kobj, const struct kobj_type *ktype);

The ktype is required for a kobject to be created properly, as every kobject
must have an associated kobj_type.  After calling kobject_init(), to
register the kobject with sysfs, the function kobject_add() must be called::

    int kobject_add(struct kobject *kobj, struct kobject *parent,
                    const char *fmt, ...);

This sets up the parent of the kobject and the name for the kobject
properly.  If the kobject is to be associated with a specific kset,
kobj->kset must be assigned before calling kobject_add().  If a kset is
associated with a kobject, then the parent for the kobject can be set to
NULL in the call to kobject_add() and then the kobject's parent will be the
kset itself.

As the name of the kobject is set when it is added to the kernel, the name
of the kobject should never be manipulated directly.  If you must change
the name of the kobject, call kobject_rename()::

    int kobject_rename(struct kobject *kobj, const char *new_name);

kobject_rename() does not perform any locking or have a solid notion of
what names are valid so the caller must provide their own sanity checking
and serialization.

There is a function called kobject_set_name() but that is legacy cruft and
is being removed.  If your code needs to call this function, it is
incorrect and needs to be fixed.

To properly access the name of the kobject, use the function
kobject_name()::

    const char *kobject_name(const struct kobject * kobj);

There is a helper function to both initialize and add the kobject to the
kernel at the same time, called surprisingly enough kobject_init_and_add()::

    int kobject_init_and_add(struct kobject *kobj, const struct kobj_type *ktype,
                             struct kobject *parent, const char *fmt, ...);

The arguments are the same as the individual kobject_init() and
kobject_add() functions described above.


Uevents
=======

After a kobject has been registered with the kobject core, you need to
announce to the world that it has been created.  This can be done with a
call to kobject_uevent()::

    int kobject_uevent(struct kobject *kobj, enum kobject_action action);

Use the **KOBJ_ADD** action for when the kobject is first added to the kernel.
This should be done only after any attributes or children of the kobject
have been initialized properly, as userspace will instantly start to look
for them when this call happens.

When the kobject is removed from the kernel (details on how to do that are
below), the uevent for **KOBJ_REMOVE** will be automatically created by the
kobject core, so the caller does not have to worry about doing that by
hand.


Reference counts
================

One of the key functions of a kobject is to serve as a reference counter
for the object in which it is embedded. As long as references to the object
exist, the object (and the code which supports it) must continue to exist.
The low-level functions for manipulating a kobject's reference counts are::

    struct kobject *kobject_get(struct kobject *kobj);
    void kobject_put(struct kobject *kobj);

A successful call to kobject_get() will increment the kobject's reference
counter and return the pointer to the kobject.

When a reference is released, the call to kobject_put() will decrement the
reference count and, possibly, free the object. Note that kobject_init()
sets the reference count to one, so the code which sets up the kobject will
need to do a kobject_put() eventually to release that reference.

Because kobjects are dynamic, they must not be declared statically or on
the stack, but instead, always allocated dynamically.  Future versions of
the kernel will contain a run-time check for kobjects that are created
statically and will warn the developer of this improper usage.

If all that you want to use a kobject for is to provide a reference counter
for your structure, please use the struct kref instead; a kobject would be
overkill.  For more information on how to use struct kref, please see the
file Documentation/core-api/kref.rst in the Linux kernel source tree.


Creating "simple" kobjects
==========================

Sometimes all that a developer wants is a way to create a simple directory
in the sysfs hierarchy, and not have to mess with the whole complication of
ksets, show and store functions, and other details.  This is the one
exception where a single kobject should be created.  To create such an
entry, use the function::

    struct kobject *kobject_create_and_add(const char *name, struct kobject *parent);

This function will create a kobject and place it in sysfs in the location
underneath the specified parent kobject.  To create simple attributes
associated with this kobject, use::

    int sysfs_create_file(struct kobject *kobj, const struct attribute *attr);

or::

    int sysfs_create_group(struct kobject *kobj, const struct attribute_group *grp);

Both types of attributes used here, with a kobject that has been created
with the kobject_create_and_add(), can be of type kobj_attribute, so no
special custom attribute is needed to be created.

See the example module, ``samples/kobject/kobject-example.c`` for an
implementation of a simple kobject and attributes.



ktypes and release methods
==========================

One important thing still missing from the discussion is what happens to a
kobject when its reference count reaches zero. The code which created the
kobject generally does not know when that will happen; if it did, there
would be little point in using a kobject in the first place. Even
predictable object lifecycles become more complicated when sysfs is brought
in as other portions of the kernel can get a reference on any kobject that
is registered in the system.

The end result is that a structure protected by a kobject cannot be freed
before its reference count goes to zero. The reference count is not under
the direct control of the code which created the kobject. So that code must
be notified asynchronously whenever the last reference to one of its
kobjects goes away.

Once you registered your kobject via kobject_add(), you must never use
kfree() to free it directly. The only safe way is to use kobject_put(). It
is good practice to always use kobject_put() after kobject_init() to avoid
errors creeping in.

This notification is done through a kobject's release() method. Usually
such a method has a form like::

    void my_object_release(struct kobject *kobj)
    {
            struct my_object *mine = container_of(kobj, struct my_object, kobj);

            /* Perform any additional cleanup on this object, then... */
            kfree(mine);
    }

One important point cannot be overstated: every kobject must have a
release() method, and the kobject must persist (in a consistent state)
until that method is called. If these constraints are not met, the code is
flawed. Note that the kernel will warn you if you forget to provide a
release() method.  Do not try to get rid of this warning by providing an
"empty" release function.

If all your cleanup function needs to do is call kfree(), then you must
create a wrapper function which uses container_of() to upcast to the correct
type (as shown in the example above) and then calls kfree() on the overall
structure.

Note, the name of the kobject is available in the release function, but it
must NOT be changed within this callback.  Otherwise there will be a memory
leak in the kobject core, which makes people unhappy.

Interestingly, the release() method is not stored in the kobject itself;
instead, it is associated with the ktype. So let us introduce struct
kobj_type::

    struct kobj_type {
            void (*release)(struct kobject *kobj);
            const struct sysfs_ops *sysfs_ops;
            const struct attribute_group **default_groups;
            const struct kobj_ns_type_operations *(*child_ns_type)(struct kobject *kobj);
            const void *(*namespace)(struct kobject *kobj);
            void (*get_ownership)(struct kobject *kobj, kuid_t *uid, kgid_t *gid);
    };

This structure is used to describe a particular type of kobject (or, more
correctly, of containing object). Every kobject needs to have an associated
kobj_type structure; a pointer to that structure must be specified when you
call kobject_init() or kobject_init_and_add().

The release field in struct kobj_type is, of course, a pointer to the
release() method for this type of kobject. The other two fields (sysfs_ops
and default_groups) control how objects of this type are represented in
sysfs; they are beyond the scope of this document.

The default_groups pointer is a list of default attributes that will be
automatically created for any kobject that is registered with this ktype.


ksets
=====

A kset is merely a collection of kobjects that want to be associated with
each other.  There is no restriction that they be of the same ktype, but be
very careful if they are not.

A kset serves these functions:

 - It serves as a bag containing a group of objects. A kset can be used by
   the kernel to track "all block devices" or "all PCI device drivers."

 - A kset is also a subdirectory in sysfs, where the associated kobjects
   with the kset can show up.  Every kset contains a kobject which can be
   set up to be the parent of other kobjects; the top-level directories of
   the sysfs hierarchy are constructed in this way.

 - Ksets can support the "hotplugging" of kobjects and influence how
   uevent events are reported to user space.

In object-oriented terms, "kset" is the top-level container class; ksets
contain their own kobject, but that kobject is managed by the kset code and
should not be manipulated by any other user.

A kset keeps its children in a standard kernel linked list.  Kobjects point
back to their containing kset via their kset field. In almost all cases,
the kobjects belonging to a kset have that kset (or, strictly, its embedded
kobject) in their parent.

As a kset contains a kobject within it, it should always be dynamically
created and never declared statically or on the stack.  To create a new
kset use::

  struct kset *kset_create_and_add(const char *name,
                                   const struct kset_uevent_ops *uevent_ops,
                                   struct kobject *parent_kobj);

When you are finished with the kset, call::

  void kset_unregister(struct kset *k);

to destroy it.  This removes the kset from sysfs and decrements its reference
count.  When the reference count goes to zero, the kset will be released.
Because other references to the kset may still exist, the release may happen
after kset_unregister() returns.

An example of using a kset can be seen in the
``samples/kobject/kset-example.c`` file in the kernel tree.

If a kset wishes to control the uevent operations of the kobjects
associated with it, it can use the struct kset_uevent_ops to handle it::

  struct kset_uevent_ops {
          int (* const filter)(struct kobject *kobj);
          const char *(* const name)(struct kobject *kobj);
          int (* const uevent)(struct kobject *kobj, struct kobj_uevent_env *env);
  };


The filter function allows a kset to prevent a uevent from being emitted to
userspace for a specific kobject.  If the function returns 0, the uevent
will not be emitted.

The name function will be called to override the default name of the kset
that the uevent sends to userspace.  By default, the name will be the same
as the kset itself, but this function, if present, can override that name.

The uevent function will be called when the uevent is about to be sent to
userspace to allow more environment variables to be added to the uevent.

One might ask how, exactly, a kobject is added to a kset, given that no
functions which perform that function have been presented.  The answer is
that this task is handled by kobject_add().  When a kobject is passed to
kobject_add(), its kset member should point to the kset to which the
kobject will belong.  kobject_add() will handle the rest.

If the kobject belonging to a kset has no parent kobject set, it will be
added to the kset's directory.  Not all members of a kset do necessarily
live in the kset directory.  If an explicit parent kobject is assigned
before the kobject is added, the kobject is registered with the kset, but
added below the parent kobject.


Kobject removal
===============

After a kobject has been registered with the kobject core successfully, it
must be cleaned up when the code is finished with it.  To do that, call
kobject_put().  By doing this, the kobject core will automatically clean up
all of the memory allocated by this kobject.  If a ``KOBJ_ADD`` uevent has been
sent for the object, a corresponding ``KOBJ_REMOVE`` uevent will be sent, and
any other sysfs housekeeping will be handled for the caller properly.

If you need to do a two-stage delete of the kobject (say you are not
allowed to sleep when you need to destroy the object), then call
kobject_del() which will unregister the kobject from sysfs.  This makes the
kobject "invisible", but it is not cleaned up, and the reference count of
the object is still the same.  At a later time call kobject_put() to finish
the cleanup of the memory associated with the kobject.

kobject_del() can be used to drop the reference to the parent object, if
circular references are constructed.  It is valid in some cases, that a
parent objects references a child.  Circular references _must_ be broken
with an explicit call to kobject_del(), so that a release functions will be
called, and the objects in the former circle release each other.


Example code to copy from
=========================

For a more complete example of using ksets and kobjects properly, see the
example programs ``samples/kobject/{kobject-example.c,kset-example.c}``,
which will be built as loadable modules if you select ``CONFIG_SAMPLE_KOBJECT``.
===================================================
Adding reference counters (krefs) to kernel objects
===================================================

:Author: Corey Minyard <minyard@acm.org>
:Author: Thomas Hellstrom <thellstrom@vmware.com>

A lot of this was lifted from Greg Kroah-Hartman's 2004 OLS paper and
presentation on krefs, which can be found at:

  - http://www.kroah.com/linux/talks/ols_2004_kref_paper/Reprint-Kroah-Hartman-OLS2004.pdf
  - http://www.kroah.com/linux/talks/ols_2004_kref_talk/

Introduction
============

krefs allow you to add reference counters to your objects.  If you
have objects that are used in multiple places and passed around, and
you don't have refcounts, your code is almost certainly broken.  If
you want refcounts, krefs are the way to go.

To use a kref, add one to your data structures like::

    struct my_data
    {
	.
	.
	struct kref refcount;
	.
	.
    };

The kref can occur anywhere within the data structure.

Initialization
==============

You must initialize the kref after you allocate it.  To do this, call
kref_init as so::

     struct my_data *data;

     data = kmalloc(sizeof(*data), GFP_KERNEL);
     if (!data)
            return -ENOMEM;
     kref_init(&data->refcount);

This sets the refcount in the kref to 1.

Kref rules
==========

Once you have an initialized kref, you must follow the following
rules:

1) If you make a non-temporary copy of a pointer, especially if
   it can be passed to another thread of execution, you must
   increment the refcount with kref_get() before passing it off::

       kref_get(&data->refcount);

   If you already have a valid pointer to a kref-ed structure (the
   refcount cannot go to zero) you may do this without a lock.

2) When you are done with a pointer, you must call kref_put()::

       kref_put(&data->refcount, data_release);

   If this is the last reference to the pointer, the release
   routine will be called.  If the code never tries to get
   a valid pointer to a kref-ed structure without already
   holding a valid pointer, it is safe to do this without
   a lock.

3) If the code attempts to gain a reference to a kref-ed structure
   without already holding a valid pointer, it must serialize access
   where a kref_put() cannot occur during the kref_get(), and the
   structure must remain valid during the kref_get().

For example, if you allocate some data and then pass it to another
thread to process::

    void data_release(struct kref *ref)
    {
	struct my_data *data = container_of(ref, struct my_data, refcount);
	kfree(data);
    }

    void more_data_handling(void *cb_data)
    {
	struct my_data *data = cb_data;
	.
	. do stuff with data here
	.
	kref_put(&data->refcount, data_release);
    }

    int my_data_handler(void)
    {
	int rv = 0;
	struct my_data *data;
	struct task_struct *task;
	data = kmalloc(sizeof(*data), GFP_KERNEL);
	if (!data)
		return -ENOMEM;
	kref_init(&data->refcount);

	kref_get(&data->refcount);
	task = kthread_run(more_data_handling, data, "more_data_handling");
	if (task == ERR_PTR(-ENOMEM)) {
		rv = -ENOMEM;
	        kref_put(&data->refcount, data_release);
		goto out;
	}

	.
	. do stuff with data here
	.
    out:
	kref_put(&data->refcount, data_release);
	return rv;
    }

This way, it doesn't matter what order the two threads handle the
data, the kref_put() handles knowing when the data is not referenced
any more and releasing it.  The kref_get() does not require a lock,
since we already have a valid pointer that we own a refcount for.  The
put needs no lock because nothing tries to get the data without
already holding a pointer.

In the above example, kref_put() will be called 2 times in both success
and error paths. This is necessary because the reference count got
incremented 2 times by kref_init() and kref_get().

Note that the "before" in rule 1 is very important.  You should never
do something like::

	task = kthread_run(more_data_handling, data, "more_data_handling");
	if (task == ERR_PTR(-ENOMEM)) {
		rv = -ENOMEM;
		goto out;
	} else
		/* BAD BAD BAD - get is after the handoff */
		kref_get(&data->refcount);

Don't assume you know what you are doing and use the above construct.
First of all, you may not know what you are doing.  Second, you may
know what you are doing (there are some situations where locking is
involved where the above may be legal) but someone else who doesn't
know what they are doing may change the code or copy the code.  It's
bad style.  Don't do it.

There are some situations where you can optimize the gets and puts.
For instance, if you are done with an object and enqueuing it for
something else or passing it off to something else, there is no reason
to do a get then a put::

	/* Silly extra get and put */
	kref_get(&obj->ref);
	enqueue(obj);
	kref_put(&obj->ref, obj_cleanup);

Just do the enqueue.  A comment about this is always welcome::

	enqueue(obj);
	/* We are done with obj, so we pass our refcount off
	   to the queue.  DON'T TOUCH obj AFTER HERE! */

The last rule (rule 3) is the nastiest one to handle.  Say, for
instance, you have a list of items that are each kref-ed, and you wish
to get the first one.  You can't just pull the first item off the list
and kref_get() it.  That violates rule 3 because you are not already
holding a valid pointer.  You must add a mutex (or some other lock).
For instance::

	static DEFINE_MUTEX(mutex);
	static LIST_HEAD(q);
	struct my_data
	{
		struct kref      refcount;
		struct list_head link;
	};

	static struct my_data *get_entry()
	{
		struct my_data *entry = NULL;
		mutex_lock(&mutex);
		if (!list_empty(&q)) {
			entry = container_of(q.next, struct my_data, link);
			kref_get(&entry->refcount);
		}
		mutex_unlock(&mutex);
		return entry;
	}

	static void release_entry(struct kref *ref)
	{
		struct my_data *entry = container_of(ref, struct my_data, refcount);

		list_del(&entry->link);
		kfree(entry);
	}

	static void put_entry(struct my_data *entry)
	{
		mutex_lock(&mutex);
		kref_put(&entry->refcount, release_entry);
		mutex_unlock(&mutex);
	}

The kref_put() return value is useful if you do not want to hold the
lock during the whole release operation.  Say you didn't want to call
kfree() with the lock held in the example above (since it is kind of
pointless to do so).  You could use kref_put() as follows::

	static void release_entry(struct kref *ref)
	{
		/* All work is done after the return from kref_put(). */
	}

	static void put_entry(struct my_data *entry)
	{
		mutex_lock(&mutex);
		if (kref_put(&entry->refcount, release_entry)) {
			list_del(&entry->link);
			mutex_unlock(&mutex);
			kfree(entry);
		} else
			mutex_unlock(&mutex);
	}

This is really more useful if you have to call other routines as part
of the free operations that could take a long time or might claim the
same lock.  Note that doing everything in the release routine is still
preferred as it is a little neater.

The above example could also be optimized using kref_get_unless_zero() in
the following way::

	static struct my_data *get_entry()
	{
		struct my_data *entry = NULL;
		mutex_lock(&mutex);
		if (!list_empty(&q)) {
			entry = container_of(q.next, struct my_data, link);
			if (!kref_get_unless_zero(&entry->refcount))
				entry = NULL;
		}
		mutex_unlock(&mutex);
		return entry;
	}

	static void release_entry(struct kref *ref)
	{
		struct my_data *entry = container_of(ref, struct my_data, refcount);

		mutex_lock(&mutex);
		list_del(&entry->link);
		mutex_unlock(&mutex);
		kfree(entry);
	}

	static void put_entry(struct my_data *entry)
	{
		kref_put(&entry->refcount, release_entry);
	}

Which is useful to remove the mutex lock around kref_put() in put_entry(), but
it's important that kref_get_unless_zero is enclosed in the same critical
section that finds the entry in the lookup table,
otherwise kref_get_unless_zero may reference already freed memory.
Note that it is illegal to use kref_get_unless_zero without checking its
return value. If you are sure (by already having a valid pointer) that
kref_get_unless_zero() will return true, then use kref_get() instead.

Krefs and RCU
=============

The function kref_get_unless_zero also makes it possible to use rcu
locking for lookups in the above example::

	struct my_data
	{
		struct rcu_head rhead;
		.
		struct kref refcount;
		.
		.
	};

	static struct my_data *get_entry_rcu()
	{
		struct my_data *entry = NULL;
		rcu_read_lock();
		if (!list_empty(&q)) {
			entry = container_of(q.next, struct my_data, link);
			if (!kref_get_unless_zero(&entry->refcount))
				entry = NULL;
		}
		rcu_read_unlock();
		return entry;
	}

	static void release_entry_rcu(struct kref *ref)
	{
		struct my_data *entry = container_of(ref, struct my_data, refcount);

		mutex_lock(&mutex);
		list_del_rcu(&entry->link);
		mutex_unlock(&mutex);
		kfree_rcu(entry, rhead);
	}

	static void put_entry(struct my_data *entry)
	{
		kref_put(&entry->refcount, release_entry_rcu);
	}

But note that the struct kref member needs to remain in valid memory for a
rcu grace period after release_entry_rcu was called. That can be accomplished
by using kfree_rcu(entry, rhead) as done above, or by calling synchronize_rcu()
before using kfree, but note that synchronize_rcu() may sleep for a
substantial amount of time.
==========================================
Reed-Solomon Library Programming Interface
==========================================

:Author: Thomas Gleixner

Introduction
============

The generic Reed-Solomon Library provides encoding, decoding and error
correction functions.

Reed-Solomon codes are used in communication and storage applications to
ensure data integrity.

This documentation is provided for developers who want to utilize the
functions provided by the library.

Known Bugs And Assumptions
==========================

None.

Usage
=====

This chapter provides examples of how to use the library.

Initializing
------------

The init function init_rs returns a pointer to an rs decoder structure,
which holds the necessary information for encoding, decoding and error
correction with the given polynomial. It either uses an existing
matching decoder or creates a new one. On creation all the lookup tables
for fast en/decoding are created. The function may take a while, so make
sure not to call it in critical code paths.

::

    /* the Reed Solomon control structure */
    static struct rs_control *rs_decoder;

    /* Symbolsize is 10 (bits)
     * Primitive polynomial is x^10+x^3+1
     * first consecutive root is 0
     * primitive element to generate roots = 1
     * generator polynomial degree (number of roots) = 6
     */
    rs_decoder = init_rs (10, 0x409, 0, 1, 6);


Encoding
--------

The encoder calculates the Reed-Solomon code over the given data length
and stores the result in the parity buffer. Note that the parity buffer
must be initialized before calling the encoder.

The expanded data can be inverted on the fly by providing a non-zero
inversion mask. The expanded data is XOR'ed with the mask. This is used
e.g. for FLASH ECC, where the all 0xFF is inverted to an all 0x00. The
Reed-Solomon code for all 0x00 is all 0x00. The code is inverted before
storing to FLASH so it is 0xFF too. This prevents that reading from an
erased FLASH results in ECC errors.

The databytes are expanded to the given symbol size on the fly. There is
no support for encoding continuous bitstreams with a symbol size != 8 at
the moment. If it is necessary it should be not a big deal to implement
such functionality.

::

    /* Parity buffer. Size = number of roots */
    uint16_t par[6];
    /* Initialize the parity buffer */
    memset(par, 0, sizeof(par));
    /* Encode 512 byte in data8. Store parity in buffer par */
    encode_rs8 (rs_decoder, data8, 512, par, 0);


Decoding
--------

The decoder calculates the syndrome over the given data length and the
received parity symbols and corrects errors in the data.

If a syndrome is available from a hardware decoder then the syndrome
calculation is skipped.

The correction of the data buffer can be suppressed by providing a
correction pattern buffer and an error location buffer to the decoder.
The decoder stores the calculated error location and the correction
bitmask in the given buffers. This is useful for hardware decoders which
use a weird bit ordering scheme.

The databytes are expanded to the given symbol size on the fly. There is
no support for decoding continuous bitstreams with a symbolsize != 8 at
the moment. If it is necessary it should be not a big deal to implement
such functionality.

Decoding with syndrome calculation, direct data correction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    /* Parity buffer. Size = number of roots */
    uint16_t par[6];
    uint8_t  data[512];
    int numerr;
    /* Receive data */
    .....
    /* Receive parity */
    .....
    /* Decode 512 byte in data8.*/
    numerr = decode_rs8 (rs_decoder, data8, par, 512, NULL, 0, NULL, 0, NULL);


Decoding with syndrome given by hardware decoder, direct data correction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    /* Parity buffer. Size = number of roots */
    uint16_t par[6], syn[6];
    uint8_t  data[512];
    int numerr;
    /* Receive data */
    .....
    /* Receive parity */
    .....
    /* Get syndrome from hardware decoder */
    .....
    /* Decode 512 byte in data8.*/
    numerr = decode_rs8 (rs_decoder, data8, par, 512, syn, 0, NULL, 0, NULL);


Decoding with syndrome given by hardware decoder, no direct data correction.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note: It's not necessary to give data and received parity to the
decoder.

::

    /* Parity buffer. Size = number of roots */
    uint16_t par[6], syn[6], corr[8];
    uint8_t  data[512];
    int numerr, errpos[8];
    /* Receive data */
    .....
    /* Receive parity */
    .....
    /* Get syndrome from hardware decoder */
    .....
    /* Decode 512 byte in data8.*/
    numerr = decode_rs8 (rs_decoder, NULL, NULL, 512, syn, 0, errpos, 0, corr);
    for (i = 0; i < numerr; i++) {
        do_error_correction_in_your_buffer(errpos[i], corr[i]);
    }


Cleanup
-------

The function free_rs frees the allocated resources, if the caller is
the last user of the decoder.

::

    /* Release resources */
    free_rs(rs_decoder);


Structures
==========

This chapter contains the autogenerated documentation of the structures
which are used in the Reed-Solomon Library and are relevant for a
developer.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rslib.h
   :internal:

Public Functions Provided
=========================

This chapter contains the autogenerated documentation of the
Reed-Solomon functions which are exported.

.. kernel-doc:: lib/reed_solomon/reed_solomon.c
   :export:

Credits
=======

The library code for encoding and decoding was written by Phil Karn.

::

            Copyright 2002, Phil Karn, KA9Q
            May be used under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL)


The wrapper functions and interfaces are written by Thomas Gleixner.

Many users have provided bugfixes, improvements and helping hands for
testing. Thanks a lot.

The following people have contributed to this document:

Thomas Gleixner\ tglx@linutronix.de

.. _local_ops:

=================================================
Semantics and Behavior of Local Atomic Operations
=================================================

:Author: Mathieu Desnoyers


This document explains the purpose of the local atomic operations, how
to implement them for any given architecture and shows how they can be used
properly. It also stresses on the precautions that must be taken when reading
those local variables across CPUs when the order of memory writes matters.

.. note::

    Note that ``local_t`` based operations are not recommended for general
    kernel use. Please use the ``this_cpu`` operations instead unless there is
    really a special purpose. Most uses of ``local_t`` in the kernel have been
    replaced by ``this_cpu`` operations. ``this_cpu`` operations combine the
    relocation with the ``local_t`` like semantics in a single instruction and
    yield more compact and faster executing code.


Purpose of local atomic operations
==================================

Local atomic operations are meant to provide fast and highly reentrant per CPU
counters. They minimize the performance cost of standard atomic operations by
removing the LOCK prefix and memory barriers normally required to synchronize
across CPUs.

Having fast per CPU atomic counters is interesting in many cases: it does not
require disabling interrupts to protect from interrupt handlers and it permits
coherent counters in NMI handlers. It is especially useful for tracing purposes
and for various performance monitoring counters.

Local atomic operations only guarantee variable modification atomicity wrt the
CPU which owns the data. Therefore, care must taken to make sure that only one
CPU writes to the ``local_t`` data. This is done by using per cpu data and
making sure that we modify it from within a preemption safe context. It is
however permitted to read ``local_t`` data from any CPU: it will then appear to
be written out of order wrt other memory writes by the owner CPU.


Implementation for a given architecture
=======================================

It can be done by slightly modifying the standard atomic operations: only
their UP variant must be kept. It typically means removing LOCK prefix (on
i386 and x86_64) and any SMP synchronization barrier. If the architecture does
not have a different behavior between SMP and UP, including
``asm-generic/local.h`` in your architecture's ``local.h`` is sufficient.

The ``local_t`` type is defined as an opaque ``signed long`` by embedding an
``atomic_long_t`` inside a structure. This is made so a cast from this type to
a ``long`` fails. The definition looks like::

    typedef struct { atomic_long_t a; } local_t;


Rules to follow when using local atomic operations
==================================================

* Variables touched by local ops must be per cpu variables.
* *Only* the CPU owner of these variables must write to them.
* This CPU can use local ops from any context (process, irq, softirq, nmi, ...)
  to update its ``local_t`` variables.
* Preemption (or interrupts) must be disabled when using local ops in
  process context to make sure the process won't be migrated to a
  different CPU between getting the per-cpu variable and doing the
  actual local op.
* When using local ops in interrupt context, no special care must be
  taken on a mainline kernel, since they will run on the local CPU with
  preemption already disabled. I suggest, however, to explicitly
  disable preemption anyway to make sure it will still work correctly on
  -rt kernels.
* Reading the local cpu variable will provide the current copy of the
  variable.
* Reads of these variables can be done from any CPU, because updates to
  "``long``", aligned, variables are always atomic. Since no memory
  synchronization is done by the writer CPU, an outdated copy of the
  variable can be read when reading some *other* cpu's variables.


How to use local atomic operations
==================================

::

    #include <linux/percpu.h>
    #include <asm/local.h>

    static DEFINE_PER_CPU(local_t, counters) = LOCAL_INIT(0);


Counting
========

Counting is done on all the bits of a signed long.

In preemptible context, use ``get_cpu_var()`` and ``put_cpu_var()`` around
local atomic operations: it makes sure that preemption is disabled around write
access to the per cpu variable. For instance::

    local_inc(&get_cpu_var(counters));
    put_cpu_var(counters);

If you are already in a preemption-safe context, you can use
``this_cpu_ptr()`` instead::

    local_inc(this_cpu_ptr(&counters));



Reading the counters
====================

Those local counters can be read from foreign CPUs to sum the count. Note that
the data seen by local_read across CPUs must be considered to be out of order
relatively to other memory writes happening on the CPU that owns the data::

    long sum = 0;
    for_each_online_cpu(cpu)
            sum += local_read(&per_cpu(counters, cpu));

If you want to use a remote local_read to synchronize access to a resource
between CPUs, explicit ``smp_wmb()`` and ``smp_rmb()`` memory barriers must be used
respectively on the writer and the reader CPUs. It would be the case if you use
the ``local_t`` variable as a counter of bytes written in a buffer: there should
be a ``smp_wmb()`` between the buffer write and the counter increment and also a
``smp_rmb()`` between the counter read and the buffer read.


Here is a sample module which implements a basic per cpu counter using
``local.h``::

    /* test-local.c
     *
     * Sample module for local.h usage.
     */


    #include <asm/local.h>
    #include <linux/module.h>
    #include <linux/timer.h>

    static DEFINE_PER_CPU(local_t, counters) = LOCAL_INIT(0);

    static struct timer_list test_timer;

    /* IPI called on each CPU. */
    static void test_each(void *info)
    {
            /* Increment the counter from a non preemptible context */
            printk("Increment on cpu %d\n", smp_processor_id());
            local_inc(this_cpu_ptr(&counters));

            /* This is what incrementing the variable would look like within a
             * preemptible context (it disables preemption) :
             *
             * local_inc(&get_cpu_var(counters));
             * put_cpu_var(counters);
             */
    }

    static void do_test_timer(unsigned long data)
    {
            int cpu;

            /* Increment the counters */
            on_each_cpu(test_each, NULL, 1);
            /* Read all the counters */
            printk("Counters read from CPU %d\n", smp_processor_id());
            for_each_online_cpu(cpu) {
                    printk("Read : CPU %d, count %ld\n", cpu,
                            local_read(&per_cpu(counters, cpu)));
            }
            mod_timer(&test_timer, jiffies + 1000);
    }

    static int __init test_init(void)
    {
            /* initialize the timer that will increment the counter */
            timer_setup(&test_timer, do_test_timer, 0);
            mod_timer(&test_timer, jiffies + 1);

            return 0;
    }

    static void __exit test_exit(void)
    {
            timer_shutdown_sync(&test_timer);
    }

    module_init(test_init);
    module_exit(test_exit);

    MODULE_LICENSE("GPL");
    MODULE_AUTHOR("Mathieu Desnoyers");
    MODULE_DESCRIPTION("Local Atomic Ops");
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+


==========
Maple Tree
==========

:Author: Liam R. Howlett

Overview
========

The Maple Tree is a B-Tree data type which is optimized for storing
non-overlapping ranges, including ranges of size 1.  The tree was designed to
be simple to use and does not require a user written search method.  It
supports iterating over a range of entries and going to the previous or next
entry in a cache-efficient manner.  The tree can also be put into an RCU-safe
mode of operation which allows reading and writing concurrently.  Writers must
synchronize on a lock, which can be the default spinlock, or the user can set
the lock to an external lock of a different type.

The Maple Tree maintains a small memory footprint and was designed to use
modern processor cache efficiently.  The majority of the users will be able to
use the normal API.  An :ref:`maple-tree-advanced-api` exists for more complex
scenarios.  The most important usage of the Maple Tree is the tracking of the
virtual memory areas.

The Maple Tree can store values between ``0`` and ``ULONG_MAX``.  The Maple
Tree reserves values with the bottom two bits set to '10' which are below 4096
(ie 2, 6, 10 .. 4094) for internal use.  If the entries may use reserved
entries then the users can convert the entries using xa_mk_value() and convert
them back by calling xa_to_value().  If the user needs to use a reserved
value, then the user can convert the value when using the
:ref:`maple-tree-advanced-api`, but are blocked by the normal API.

The Maple Tree can also be configured to support searching for a gap of a given
size (or larger).

Pre-allocating of nodes is also supported using the
:ref:`maple-tree-advanced-api`.  This is useful for users who must guarantee a
successful store operation within a given
code segment when allocating cannot be done.  Allocations of nodes are
relatively small at around 256 bytes.

.. _maple-tree-normal-api:

Normal API
==========

Start by initialising a maple tree, either with DEFINE_MTREE() for statically
allocated maple trees or mt_init() for dynamically allocated ones.  A
freshly-initialised maple tree contains a ``NULL`` pointer for the range ``0``
- ``ULONG_MAX``.  There are currently two types of maple trees supported: the
allocation tree and the regular tree.  The regular tree has a higher branching
factor for internal nodes.  The allocation tree has a lower branching factor
but allows the user to search for a gap of a given size or larger from either
``0`` upwards or ``ULONG_MAX`` down.  An allocation tree can be used by
passing in the ``MT_FLAGS_ALLOC_RANGE`` flag when initialising the tree.

You can then set entries using mtree_store() or mtree_store_range().
mtree_store() will overwrite any entry with the new entry and return 0 on
success or an error code otherwise.  mtree_store_range() works in the same way
but takes a range.  mtree_load() is used to retrieve the entry stored at a
given index.  You can use mtree_erase() to erase an entire range by only
knowing one value within that range, or mtree_store() call with an entry of
NULL may be used to partially erase a range or many ranges at once.

If you want to only store a new entry to a range (or index) if that range is
currently ``NULL``, you can use mtree_insert_range() or mtree_insert() which
return -EEXIST if the range is not empty.

You can search for an entry from an index upwards by using mt_find().

You can walk each entry within a range by calling mt_for_each().  You must
provide a temporary variable to store a cursor.  If you want to walk each
element of the tree then ``0`` and ``ULONG_MAX`` may be used as the range.  If
the caller is going to hold the lock for the duration of the walk then it is
worth looking at the mas_for_each() API in the :ref:`maple-tree-advanced-api`
section.

Sometimes it is necessary to ensure the next call to store to a maple tree does
not allocate memory, please see :ref:`maple-tree-advanced-api` for this use case.

You can use mtree_dup() to duplicate an entire maple tree. It is a more
efficient way than inserting all elements one by one into a new tree.

Finally, you can remove all entries from a maple tree by calling
mtree_destroy().  If the maple tree entries are pointers, you may wish to free
the entries first.

Allocating Nodes
----------------

The allocations are handled by the internal tree code.  See
:ref:`maple-tree-advanced-alloc` for other options.

Locking
-------

You do not have to worry about locking.  See :ref:`maple-tree-advanced-locks`
for other options.

The Maple Tree uses RCU and an internal spinlock to synchronise access:

Takes RCU read lock:
 * mtree_load()
 * mt_find()
 * mt_for_each()
 * mt_next()
 * mt_prev()

Takes ma_lock internally:
 * mtree_store()
 * mtree_store_range()
 * mtree_insert()
 * mtree_insert_range()
 * mtree_erase()
 * mtree_dup()
 * mtree_destroy()
 * mt_set_in_rcu()
 * mt_clear_in_rcu()

If you want to take advantage of the internal lock to protect the data
structures that you are storing in the Maple Tree, you can call mtree_lock()
before calling mtree_load(), then take a reference count on the object you
have found before calling mtree_unlock().  This will prevent stores from
removing the object from the tree between looking up the object and
incrementing the refcount.  You can also use RCU to avoid dereferencing
freed memory, but an explanation of that is beyond the scope of this
document.

.. _maple-tree-advanced-api:

Advanced API
============

The advanced API offers more flexibility and better performance at the
cost of an interface which can be harder to use and has fewer safeguards.
You must take care of your own locking while using the advanced API.
You can use the ma_lock, RCU or an external lock for protection.
You can mix advanced and normal operations on the same array, as long
as the locking is compatible.  The :ref:`maple-tree-normal-api` is implemented
in terms of the advanced API.

The advanced API is based around the ma_state, this is where the 'mas'
prefix originates.  The ma_state struct keeps track of tree operations to make
life easier for both internal and external tree users.

Initialising the maple tree is the same as in the :ref:`maple-tree-normal-api`.
Please see above.

The maple state keeps track of the range start and end in mas->index and
mas->last, respectively.

mas_walk() will walk the tree to the location of mas->index and set the
mas->index and mas->last according to the range for the entry.

You can set entries using mas_store().  mas_store() will overwrite any entry
with the new entry and return the first existing entry that is overwritten.
The range is passed in as members of the maple state: index and last.

You can use mas_erase() to erase an entire range by setting index and
last of the maple state to the desired range to erase.  This will erase
the first range that is found in that range, set the maple state index
and last as the range that was erased and return the entry that existed
at that location.

You can walk each entry within a range by using mas_for_each().  If you want
to walk each element of the tree then ``0`` and ``ULONG_MAX`` may be used as
the range.  If the lock needs to be periodically dropped, see the locking
section mas_pause().

Using a maple state allows mas_next() and mas_prev() to function as if the
tree was a linked list.  With such a high branching factor the amortized
performance penalty is outweighed by cache optimization.  mas_next() will
return the next entry which occurs after the entry at index.  mas_prev()
will return the previous entry which occurs before the entry at index.

mas_find() will find the first entry which exists at or above index on
the first call, and the next entry from every subsequent calls.

mas_find_rev() will find the first entry which exists at or below the last on
the first call, and the previous entry from every subsequent calls.

If the user needs to yield the lock during an operation, then the maple state
must be paused using mas_pause().

There are a few extra interfaces provided when using an allocation tree.
If you wish to search for a gap within a range, then mas_empty_area()
or mas_empty_area_rev() can be used.  mas_empty_area() searches for a gap
starting at the lowest index given up to the maximum of the range.
mas_empty_area_rev() searches for a gap starting at the highest index given
and continues downward to the lower bound of the range.

.. _maple-tree-advanced-alloc:

Advanced Allocating Nodes
-------------------------

Allocations are usually handled internally to the tree, however if allocations
need to occur before a write occurs then calling mas_expected_entries() will
allocate the worst-case number of needed nodes to insert the provided number of
ranges.  This also causes the tree to enter mass insertion mode.  Once
insertions are complete calling mas_destroy() on the maple state will free the
unused allocations.

.. _maple-tree-advanced-locks:

Advanced Locking
----------------

The maple tree uses a spinlock by default, but external locks can be used for
tree updates as well.  To use an external lock, the tree must be initialized
with the ``MT_FLAGS_LOCK_EXTERN flag``, this is usually done with the
MTREE_INIT_EXT() #define, which takes an external lock as an argument.

Functions and structures
========================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/maple_tree.h
.. kernel-doc:: lib/maple_tree.c
.. _memory_allocation:

=======================
Memory Allocation Guide
=======================

Linux provides a variety of APIs for memory allocation. You can
allocate small chunks using `kmalloc` or `kmem_cache_alloc` families,
large virtually contiguous areas using `vmalloc` and its derivatives,
or you can directly request pages from the page allocator with
`alloc_pages`. It is also possible to use more specialized allocators,
for instance `cma_alloc` or `zs_malloc`.

Most of the memory allocation APIs use GFP flags to express how that
memory should be allocated. The GFP acronym stands for "get free
pages", the underlying memory allocation function.

Diversity of the allocation APIs combined with the numerous GFP flags
makes the question "How should I allocate memory?" not that easy to
answer, although very likely you should use

::

  kzalloc(<size>, GFP_KERNEL);

Of course there are cases when other allocation APIs and different GFP
flags must be used.

Get Free Page flags
===================

The GFP flags control the allocators behavior. They tell what memory
zones can be used, how hard the allocator should try to find free
memory, whether the memory can be accessed by the userspace etc. The
:ref:`Documentation/core-api/mm-api.rst <mm-api-gfp-flags>` provides
reference documentation for the GFP flags and their combinations and
here we briefly outline their recommended usage:

  * Most of the time ``GFP_KERNEL`` is what you need. Memory for the
    kernel data structures, DMAable memory, inode cache, all these and
    many other allocations types can use ``GFP_KERNEL``. Note, that
    using ``GFP_KERNEL`` implies ``GFP_RECLAIM``, which means that
    direct reclaim may be triggered under memory pressure; the calling
    context must be allowed to sleep.
  * If the allocation is performed from an atomic context, e.g interrupt
    handler, use ``GFP_NOWAIT``. This flag prevents direct reclaim and
    IO or filesystem operations. Consequently, under memory pressure
    ``GFP_NOWAIT`` allocation is likely to fail. Users of this flag need
    to provide a suitable fallback to cope with such failures where
    appropriate.
  * If you think that accessing memory reserves is justified and the kernel
    will be stressed unless allocation succeeds, you may use ``GFP_ATOMIC``.
  * Untrusted allocations triggered from userspace should be a subject
    of kmem accounting and must have ``__GFP_ACCOUNT`` bit set. There
    is the handy ``GFP_KERNEL_ACCOUNT`` shortcut for ``GFP_KERNEL``
    allocations that should be accounted.
  * Userspace allocations should use either of the ``GFP_USER``,
    ``GFP_HIGHUSER`` or ``GFP_HIGHUSER_MOVABLE`` flags. The longer
    the flag name the less restrictive it is.

    ``GFP_HIGHUSER_MOVABLE`` does not require that allocated memory
    will be directly accessible by the kernel and implies that the
    data is movable.

    ``GFP_HIGHUSER`` means that the allocated memory is not movable,
    but it is not required to be directly accessible by the kernel. An
    example may be a hardware allocation that maps data directly into
    userspace but has no addressing limitations.

    ``GFP_USER`` means that the allocated memory is not movable and it
    must be directly accessible by the kernel.

You may notice that quite a few allocations in the existing code
specify ``GFP_NOIO`` or ``GFP_NOFS``. Historically, they were used to
prevent recursion deadlocks caused by direct memory reclaim calling
back into the FS or IO paths and blocking on already held
resources. Since 4.12 the preferred way to address this issue is to
use new scope APIs described in
:ref:`Documentation/core-api/gfp_mask-from-fs-io.rst <gfp_mask_from_fs_io>`.

Other legacy GFP flags are ``GFP_DMA`` and ``GFP_DMA32``. They are
used to ensure that the allocated memory is accessible by hardware
with limited addressing capabilities. So unless you are writing a
driver for a device with such restrictions, avoid using these flags.
And even with hardware with restrictions it is preferable to use
`dma_alloc*` APIs.

GFP flags and reclaim behavior
------------------------------
Memory allocations may trigger direct or background reclaim and it is
useful to understand how hard the page allocator will try to satisfy that
or another request.

  * ``GFP_KERNEL & ~__GFP_RECLAIM`` - optimistic allocation without _any_
    attempt to free memory at all. The most light weight mode which even
    doesn't kick the background reclaim. Should be used carefully because it
    might deplete the memory and the next user might hit the more aggressive
    reclaim.

  * ``GFP_KERNEL & ~__GFP_DIRECT_RECLAIM`` (or ``GFP_NOWAIT``)- optimistic
    allocation without any attempt to free memory from the current
    context but can wake kswapd to reclaim memory if the zone is below
    the low watermark. Can be used from either atomic contexts or when
    the request is a performance optimization and there is another
    fallback for a slow path.

  * ``(GFP_KERNEL|__GFP_HIGH) & ~__GFP_DIRECT_RECLAIM`` (aka ``GFP_ATOMIC``) -
    non sleeping allocation with an expensive fallback so it can access
    some portion of memory reserves. Usually used from interrupt/bottom-half
    context with an expensive slow path fallback.

  * ``GFP_KERNEL`` - both background and direct reclaim are allowed and the
    **default** page allocator behavior is used. That means that not costly
    allocation requests are basically no-fail but there is no guarantee of
    that behavior so failures have to be checked properly by callers
    (e.g. OOM killer victim is allowed to fail currently).

  * ``GFP_KERNEL | __GFP_NORETRY`` - overrides the default allocator behavior
    and all allocation requests fail early rather than cause disruptive
    reclaim (one round of reclaim in this implementation). The OOM killer
    is not invoked.

  * ``GFP_KERNEL | __GFP_RETRY_MAYFAIL`` - overrides the default allocator
    behavior and all allocation requests try really hard. The request
    will fail if the reclaim cannot make any progress. The OOM killer
    won't be triggered.

  * ``GFP_KERNEL | __GFP_NOFAIL`` - overrides the default allocator behavior
    and all allocation requests will loop endlessly until they succeed.
    This might be really dangerous especially for larger orders.

Selecting memory allocator
==========================

The most straightforward way to allocate memory is to use a function
from the kmalloc() family. And, to be on the safe side it's best to use
routines that set memory to zero, like kzalloc(). If you need to
allocate memory for an array, there are kmalloc_array() and kcalloc()
helpers. The helpers struct_size(), array_size() and array3_size() can
be used to safely calculate object sizes without overflowing.

The maximal size of a chunk that can be allocated with `kmalloc` is
limited. The actual limit depends on the hardware and the kernel
configuration, but it is a good practice to use `kmalloc` for objects
smaller than page size.

The address of a chunk allocated with `kmalloc` is aligned to at least
ARCH_KMALLOC_MINALIGN bytes. For sizes which are a power of two, the
alignment is also guaranteed to be at least the respective size. For other
sizes, the alignment is guaranteed to be at least the largest power-of-two
divisor of the size.

Chunks allocated with kmalloc() can be resized with krealloc(). Similarly
to kmalloc_array(): a helper for resizing arrays is provided in the form of
krealloc_array().

For large allocations you can use vmalloc() and vzalloc(), or directly
request pages from the page allocator. The memory allocated by `vmalloc`
and related functions is not physically contiguous.

If you are not sure whether the allocation size is too large for
`kmalloc`, it is possible to use kvmalloc() and its derivatives. It will
try to allocate memory with `kmalloc` and if the allocation fails it
will be retried with `vmalloc`. There are restrictions on which GFP
flags can be used with `kvmalloc`; please see kvmalloc_node() reference
documentation. Note that `kvmalloc` may return memory that is not
physically contiguous.

If you need to allocate many identical objects you can use the slab
cache allocator. The cache should be set up with kmem_cache_create() or
kmem_cache_create_usercopy() before it can be used. The second function
should be used if a part of the cache might be copied to the userspace.
After the cache is created kmem_cache_alloc() and its convenience
wrappers can allocate memory from that cache.

When the allocated memory is no longer needed it must be freed.

Objects allocated by `kmalloc` can be freed by `kfree` or `kvfree`. Objects
allocated by `kmem_cache_alloc` can be freed with `kmem_cache_free`, `kfree`
or `kvfree`, where the latter two might be more convenient thanks to not
needing the kmem_cache pointer.

The same rules apply to _bulk and _rcu flavors of freeing functions.

Memory allocated by `vmalloc` can be freed with `vfree` or `kvfree`.
Memory allocated by `kvmalloc` can be freed with `kvfree`.
Caches created by `kmem_cache_create` should be freed with
`kmem_cache_destroy` only after freeing all the allocated objects first.
.. _memory_hotplug:

==============
Memory hotplug
==============

Memory hotplug event notifier
=============================

Hotplugging events are sent to a notification queue.

There are six types of notification defined in ``include/linux/memory.h``:

MEM_GOING_ONLINE
  Generated before new memory becomes available in order to be able to
  prepare subsystems to handle memory. The page allocator is still unable
  to allocate from the new memory.

MEM_CANCEL_ONLINE
  Generated if MEM_GOING_ONLINE fails.

MEM_ONLINE
  Generated when memory has successfully brought online. The callback may
  allocate pages from the new memory.

MEM_GOING_OFFLINE
  Generated to begin the process of offlining memory. Allocations are no
  longer possible from the memory but some of the memory to be offlined
  is still in use. The callback can be used to free memory known to a
  subsystem from the indicated memory block.

MEM_CANCEL_OFFLINE
  Generated if MEM_GOING_OFFLINE fails. Memory is available again from
  the memory block that we attempted to offline.

MEM_OFFLINE
  Generated after offlining memory is complete.

A callback routine can be registered by calling::

  hotplug_memory_notifier(callback_func, priority)

Callback functions with higher values of priority are called before callback
functions with lower values.

A callback function must have the following prototype::

  int callback_func(
    struct notifier_block *self, unsigned long action, void *arg);

The first argument of the callback function (self) is a pointer to the block
of the notifier chain that points to the callback function itself.
The second argument (action) is one of the event types described above.
The third argument (arg) passes a pointer of struct memory_notify::

	struct memory_notify {
		unsigned long start_pfn;
		unsigned long nr_pages;
		int status_change_nid_normal;
		int status_change_nid;
	}

- start_pfn is start_pfn of online/offline memory.
- nr_pages is # of pages of online/offline memory.
- status_change_nid_normal is set node id when N_NORMAL_MEMORY of nodemask
  is (will be) set/clear, if this is -1, then nodemask status is not changed.
- status_change_nid is set node id when N_MEMORY of nodemask is (will be)
  set/clear. It means a new(memoryless) node gets new memory by online and a
  node loses all memory. If this is -1, then nodemask status is not changed.

  If status_changed_nid* >= 0, callback should create/discard structures for the
  node if necessary.

The callback routine shall return one of the values
NOTIFY_DONE, NOTIFY_OK, NOTIFY_BAD, NOTIFY_STOP
defined in ``include/linux/notifier.h``

NOTIFY_DONE and NOTIFY_OK have no effect on the further processing.

NOTIFY_BAD is used as response to the MEM_GOING_ONLINE, MEM_GOING_OFFLINE,
MEM_ONLINE, or MEM_OFFLINE action to cancel hotplugging. It stops
further processing of the notification queue.

NOTIFY_STOP stops further processing of the notification queue.

Locking Internals
=================

When adding/removing memory that uses memory block devices (i.e. ordinary RAM),
the device_hotplug_lock should be held to:

- synchronize against online/offline requests (e.g. via sysfs). This way, memory
  block devices can only be accessed (.online/.state attributes) by user
  space once memory has been fully added. And when removing memory, we
  know nobody is in critical sections.
- synchronize against CPU hotplug and similar (e.g. relevant for ACPI and PPC)

Especially, there is a possible lock inversion that is avoided using
device_hotplug_lock when adding memory and user space tries to online that
memory faster than expected:

- device_online() will first take the device_lock(), followed by
  mem_hotplug_lock
- add_memory_resource() will first take the mem_hotplug_lock, followed by
  the device_lock() (while creating the devices, during bus_add_device()).

As the device is visible to user space before taking the device_lock(), this
can result in a lock inversion.

onlining/offlining of memory should be done via device_online()/
device_offline() - to make sure it is properly synchronized to actions
via sysfs. Holding device_hotplug_lock is advised (to e.g. protect online_type)

When adding/removing/onlining/offlining memory or adding/removing
heterogeneous/device memory, we should always hold the mem_hotplug_lock in
write mode to serialise memory hotplug (e.g. access to global/zone
variables).

In addition, mem_hotplug_lock (in contrast to device_hotplug_lock) in read
mode allows for a quite efficient get_online_mems/put_online_mems
implementation, so code accessing memory can protect from that memory
vanishing.
======================
Memory Management APIs
======================

User Space Memory Access
========================

.. kernel-doc:: arch/x86/include/asm/uaccess.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: arch/x86/lib/usercopy_32.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: mm/gup.c
   :functions: get_user_pages_fast

.. _mm-api-gfp-flags:

Memory Allocation Controls
==========================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/gfp_types.h
   :doc: Page mobility and placement hints

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/gfp_types.h
   :doc: Watermark modifiers

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/gfp_types.h
   :doc: Reclaim modifiers

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/gfp_types.h
   :doc: Useful GFP flag combinations

The Slab Cache
==============

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/slab.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: mm/slub.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: mm/slab_common.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: mm/util.c
   :functions: kfree_const kvmalloc_node kvfree

Virtually Contiguous Mappings
=============================

.. kernel-doc:: mm/vmalloc.c
   :export:

File Mapping and Page Cache
===========================

Filemap
-------

.. kernel-doc:: mm/filemap.c
   :export:

Readahead
---------

.. kernel-doc:: mm/readahead.c
   :doc: Readahead Overview

.. kernel-doc:: mm/readahead.c
   :export:

Writeback
---------

.. kernel-doc:: mm/page-writeback.c
   :export:

Truncate
--------

.. kernel-doc:: mm/truncate.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/pagemap.h
   :internal:

Memory pools
============

.. kernel-doc:: mm/mempool.c
   :export:

DMA pools
=========

.. kernel-doc:: mm/dmapool.c
   :export:

More Memory Management Functions
================================

.. kernel-doc:: mm/memory.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: mm/page_alloc.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/mempolicy.c
.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/mm_types.h
   :internal:
.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/mm_inline.h
.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/page-flags.h
.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/mm.h
   :internal:
.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/page_ref.h
.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/mmzone.h
.. kernel-doc:: mm/util.c
   :functions: folio_mapping

.. kernel-doc:: mm/rmap.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/migrate.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/mmap.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/kmemleak.c
.. #kernel-doc:: mm/hmm.c (build warnings)
.. kernel-doc:: mm/memremap.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/hugetlb.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/swap.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/zpool.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/memcontrol.c
.. #kernel-doc:: mm/memory-tiers.c (build warnings)
.. kernel-doc:: mm/shmem.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/migrate_device.c
.. #kernel-doc:: mm/nommu.c (duplicates kernel-doc from other files)
.. kernel-doc:: mm/mapping_dirty_helpers.c
.. #kernel-doc:: mm/memory-failure.c (build warnings)
.. kernel-doc:: mm/percpu.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/maccess.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/vmscan.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/memory_hotplug.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/mmu_notifier.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/balloon_compaction.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/huge_memory.c
.. kernel-doc:: mm/io-mapping.c
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause

.. _kernel_netlink:

===================================
Netlink notes for kernel developers
===================================

General guidance
================

Attribute enums
---------------

Older families often define "null" attributes and commands with value
of ``0`` and named ``unspec``. This is supported (``type: unused``)
but should be avoided in new families. The ``unspec`` enum values are
not used in practice, so just set the value of the first attribute to ``1``.

Message enums
-------------

Use the same command IDs for requests and replies. This makes it easier
to match them up, and we have plenty of ID space.

Use separate command IDs for notifications. This makes it easier to
sort the notifications from replies (and present them to the user
application via a different API than replies).

Answer requests
---------------

Older families do not reply to all of the commands, especially NEW / ADD
commands. User only gets information whether the operation succeeded or
not via the ACK. Try to find useful data to return. Once the command is
added whether it replies with a full message or only an ACK is uAPI and
cannot be changed. It's better to err on the side of replying.

Specifically NEW and ADD commands should reply with information identifying
the created object such as the allocated object's ID (without having to
resort to using ``NLM_F_ECHO``).

NLM_F_ECHO
----------

Make sure to pass the request info to genl_notify() to allow ``NLM_F_ECHO``
to take effect.  This is useful for programs that need precise feedback
from the kernel (for example for logging purposes).

Support dump consistency
------------------------

If iterating over objects during dump may skip over objects or repeat
them - make sure to report dump inconsistency with ``NLM_F_DUMP_INTR``.
This is usually implemented by maintaining a generation id for the
structure and recording it in the ``seq`` member of struct netlink_callback.

Netlink specification
=====================

Documentation of the Netlink specification parts which are only relevant
to the kernel space.

Globals
-------

kernel-policy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Defines whether the kernel validation policy is ``global`` i.e. the same for all
operations of the family, defined for each operation individually - ``per-op``,
or separately for each operation and operation type (do vs dump) - ``split``.
New families should use ``per-op`` (default) to be able to narrow down the
attributes accepted by a specific command.

checks
------

Documentation for the ``checks`` sub-sections of attribute specs.

unterminated-ok
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Accept strings without the null-termination (for legacy families only).
Switches from the ``NLA_NUL_STRING`` to ``NLA_STRING`` policy type.

max-len
~~~~~~~

Defines max length for a binary or string attribute (corresponding
to the ``len`` member of struct nla_policy). For string attributes terminating
null character is not counted towards ``max-len``.

The field may either be a literal integer value or a name of a defined
constant. String types may reduce the constant by one
(i.e. specify ``max-len: CONST - 1``) to reserve space for the terminating
character so implementations should recognize such pattern.

min-len
~~~~~~~

Similar to ``max-len`` but defines minimum length.
================================================
Generic bitfield packing and unpacking functions
================================================

Problem statement
-----------------

When working with hardware, one has to choose between several approaches of
interfacing with it.
One can memory-map a pointer to a carefully crafted struct over the hardware
device's memory region, and access its fields as struct members (potentially
declared as bitfields). But writing code this way would make it less portable,
due to potential endianness mismatches between the CPU and the hardware device.
Additionally, one has to pay close attention when translating register
definitions from the hardware documentation into bit field indices for the
structs. Also, some hardware (typically networking equipment) tends to group
its register fields in ways that violate any reasonable word boundaries
(sometimes even 64 bit ones). This creates the inconvenience of having to
define "high" and "low" portions of register fields within the struct.
A more robust alternative to struct field definitions would be to extract the
required fields by shifting the appropriate number of bits. But this would
still not protect from endianness mismatches, except if all memory accesses
were performed byte-by-byte. Also the code can easily get cluttered, and the
high-level idea might get lost among the many bit shifts required.
Many drivers take the bit-shifting approach and then attempt to reduce the
clutter with tailored macros, but more often than not these macros take
shortcuts that still prevent the code from being truly portable.

The solution
------------

This API deals with 2 basic operations:

  - Packing a CPU-usable number into a memory buffer (with hardware
    constraints/quirks)
  - Unpacking a memory buffer (which has hardware constraints/quirks)
    into a CPU-usable number.

The API offers an abstraction over said hardware constraints and quirks,
over CPU endianness and therefore between possible mismatches between
the two.

The basic unit of these API functions is the u64. From the CPU's
perspective, bit 63 always means bit offset 7 of byte 7, albeit only
logically. The question is: where do we lay this bit out in memory?

The following examples cover the memory layout of a packed u64 field.
The byte offsets in the packed buffer are always implicitly 0, 1, ... 7.
What the examples show is where the logical bytes and bits sit.

1. Normally (no quirks), we would do it like this:

::

  63 62 61 60 59 58 57 56 55 54 53 52 51 50 49 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32
  7                       6                       5                        4
  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0
  3                       2                       1                        0

That is, the MSByte (7) of the CPU-usable u64 sits at memory offset 0, and the
LSByte (0) of the u64 sits at memory offset 7.
This corresponds to what most folks would regard to as "big endian", where
bit i corresponds to the number 2^i. This is also referred to in the code
comments as "logical" notation.


2. If QUIRK_MSB_ON_THE_RIGHT is set, we do it like this:

::

  56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39
  7                       6                        5                       4
  24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
  3                       2                        1                       0

That is, QUIRK_MSB_ON_THE_RIGHT does not affect byte positioning, but
inverts bit offsets inside a byte.


3. If QUIRK_LITTLE_ENDIAN is set, we do it like this:

::

  39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 55 54 53 52 51 50 49 48 63 62 61 60 59 58 57 56
  4                       5                       6                       7
  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0  15 14 13 12 11 10  9  8 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24
  0                       1                       2                       3

Therefore, QUIRK_LITTLE_ENDIAN means that inside the memory region, every
byte from each 4-byte word is placed at its mirrored position compared to
the boundary of that word.

4. If QUIRK_MSB_ON_THE_RIGHT and QUIRK_LITTLE_ENDIAN are both set, we do it
   like this:

::

  32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63
  4                       5                       6                       7
  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
  0                       1                       2                       3


5. If just QUIRK_LSW32_IS_FIRST is set, we do it like this:

::

  31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0
  3                       2                       1                        0
  63 62 61 60 59 58 57 56 55 54 53 52 51 50 49 48 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32
  7                       6                       5                        4

In this case the 8 byte memory region is interpreted as follows: first
4 bytes correspond to the least significant 4-byte word, next 4 bytes to
the more significant 4-byte word.


6. If QUIRK_LSW32_IS_FIRST and QUIRK_MSB_ON_THE_RIGHT are set, we do it like
   this:

::

  24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
  3                       2                        1                       0
  56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39
  7                       6                        5                       4


7. If QUIRK_LSW32_IS_FIRST and QUIRK_LITTLE_ENDIAN are set, it looks like
   this:

::

  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0  15 14 13 12 11 10  9  8 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24
  0                       1                       2                       3
  39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 47 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 55 54 53 52 51 50 49 48 63 62 61 60 59 58 57 56
  4                       5                       6                       7


8. If QUIRK_LSW32_IS_FIRST, QUIRK_LITTLE_ENDIAN and QUIRK_MSB_ON_THE_RIGHT
   are set, it looks like this:

::

  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
  0                       1                       2                       3
  32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63
  4                       5                       6                       7


We always think of our offsets as if there were no quirk, and we translate
them afterwards, before accessing the memory region.

Intended use
------------

Drivers that opt to use this API first need to identify which of the above 3
quirk combinations (for a total of 8) match what the hardware documentation
describes. Then they should wrap the packing() function, creating a new
xxx_packing() that calls it using the proper QUIRK_* one-hot bits set.

The packing() function returns an int-encoded error code, which protects the
programmer against incorrect API use.  The errors are not expected to occur
during runtime, therefore it is reasonable for xxx_packing() to return void
and simply swallow those errors. Optionally it can dump stack or print the
error description.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=======================================
The padata parallel execution mechanism
=======================================

:Date: May 2020

Padata is a mechanism by which the kernel can farm jobs out to be done in
parallel on multiple CPUs while optionally retaining their ordering.

It was originally developed for IPsec, which needs to perform encryption and
decryption on large numbers of packets without reordering those packets.  This
is currently the sole consumer of padata's serialized job support.

Padata also supports multithreaded jobs, splitting up the job evenly while load
balancing and coordinating between threads.

Running Serialized Jobs
=======================

Initializing
------------

The first step in using padata to run serialized jobs is to set up a
padata_instance structure for overall control of how jobs are to be run::

    #include <linux/padata.h>

    struct padata_instance *padata_alloc(const char *name);

'name' simply identifies the instance.

Then, complete padata initialization by allocating a padata_shell::

   struct padata_shell *padata_alloc_shell(struct padata_instance *pinst);

A padata_shell is used to submit a job to padata and allows a series of such
jobs to be serialized independently.  A padata_instance may have one or more
padata_shells associated with it, each allowing a separate series of jobs.

Modifying cpumasks
------------------

The CPUs used to run jobs can be changed in two ways, programmatically with
padata_set_cpumask() or via sysfs.  The former is defined::

    int padata_set_cpumask(struct padata_instance *pinst, int cpumask_type,
			   cpumask_var_t cpumask);

Here cpumask_type is one of PADATA_CPU_PARALLEL or PADATA_CPU_SERIAL, where a
parallel cpumask describes which processors will be used to execute jobs
submitted to this instance in parallel and a serial cpumask defines which
processors are allowed to be used as the serialization callback processor.
cpumask specifies the new cpumask to use.

There may be sysfs files for an instance's cpumasks.  For example, pcrypt's
live in /sys/kernel/pcrypt/<instance-name>.  Within an instance's directory
there are two files, parallel_cpumask and serial_cpumask, and either cpumask
may be changed by echoing a bitmask into the file, for example::

    echo f > /sys/kernel/pcrypt/pencrypt/parallel_cpumask

Reading one of these files shows the user-supplied cpumask, which may be
different from the 'usable' cpumask.

Padata maintains two pairs of cpumasks internally, the user-supplied cpumasks
and the 'usable' cpumasks.  (Each pair consists of a parallel and a serial
cpumask.)  The user-supplied cpumasks default to all possible CPUs on instance
allocation and may be changed as above.  The usable cpumasks are always a
subset of the user-supplied cpumasks and contain only the online CPUs in the
user-supplied masks; these are the cpumasks padata actually uses.  So it is
legal to supply a cpumask to padata that contains offline CPUs.  Once an
offline CPU in the user-supplied cpumask comes online, padata is going to use
it.

Changing the CPU masks are expensive operations, so it should not be done with
great frequency.

Running A Job
-------------

Actually submitting work to the padata instance requires the creation of a
padata_priv structure, which represents one job::

    struct padata_priv {
        /* Other stuff here... */
	void                    (*parallel)(struct padata_priv *padata);
	void                    (*serial)(struct padata_priv *padata);
    };

This structure will almost certainly be embedded within some larger
structure specific to the work to be done.  Most of its fields are private to
padata, but the structure should be zeroed at initialisation time, and the
parallel() and serial() functions should be provided.  Those functions will
be called in the process of getting the work done as we will see
momentarily.

The submission of the job is done with::

    int padata_do_parallel(struct padata_shell *ps,
		           struct padata_priv *padata, int *cb_cpu);

The ps and padata structures must be set up as described above; cb_cpu
points to the preferred CPU to be used for the final callback when the job is
done; it must be in the current instance's CPU mask (if not the cb_cpu pointer
is updated to point to the CPU actually chosen).  The return value from
padata_do_parallel() is zero on success, indicating that the job is in
progress. -EBUSY means that somebody, somewhere else is messing with the
instance's CPU mask, while -EINVAL is a complaint about cb_cpu not being in the
serial cpumask, no online CPUs in the parallel or serial cpumasks, or a stopped
instance.

Each job submitted to padata_do_parallel() will, in turn, be passed to
exactly one call to the above-mentioned parallel() function, on one CPU, so
true parallelism is achieved by submitting multiple jobs.  parallel() runs with
software interrupts disabled and thus cannot sleep.  The parallel()
function gets the padata_priv structure pointer as its lone parameter;
information about the actual work to be done is probably obtained by using
container_of() to find the enclosing structure.

Note that parallel() has no return value; the padata subsystem assumes that
parallel() will take responsibility for the job from this point.  The job
need not be completed during this call, but, if parallel() leaves work
outstanding, it should be prepared to be called again with a new job before
the previous one completes.

Serializing Jobs
----------------

When a job does complete, parallel() (or whatever function actually finishes
the work) should inform padata of the fact with a call to::

    void padata_do_serial(struct padata_priv *padata);

At some point in the future, padata_do_serial() will trigger a call to the
serial() function in the padata_priv structure.  That call will happen on
the CPU requested in the initial call to padata_do_parallel(); it, too, is
run with local software interrupts disabled.
Note that this call may be deferred for a while since the padata code takes
pains to ensure that jobs are completed in the order in which they were
submitted.

Destroying
----------

Cleaning up a padata instance predictably involves calling the two free
functions that correspond to the allocation in reverse::

    void padata_free_shell(struct padata_shell *ps);
    void padata_free(struct padata_instance *pinst);

It is the user's responsibility to ensure all outstanding jobs are complete
before any of the above are called.

Running Multithreaded Jobs
==========================

A multithreaded job has a main thread and zero or more helper threads, with the
main thread participating in the job and then waiting until all helpers have
finished.  padata splits the job into units called chunks, where a chunk is a
piece of the job that one thread completes in one call to the thread function.

A user has to do three things to run a multithreaded job.  First, describe the
job by defining a padata_mt_job structure, which is explained in the Interface
section.  This includes a pointer to the thread function, which padata will
call each time it assigns a job chunk to a thread.  Then, define the thread
function, which accepts three arguments, ``start``, ``end``, and ``arg``, where
the first two delimit the range that the thread operates on and the last is a
pointer to the job's shared state, if any.  Prepare the shared state, which is
typically allocated on the main thread's stack.  Last, call
padata_do_multithreaded(), which will return once the job is finished.

Interface
=========

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/padata.h
.. kernel-doc:: kernel/padata.c
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

====================================================
pin_user_pages() and related calls
====================================================

.. contents:: :local:

Overview
========

This document describes the following functions::

 pin_user_pages()
 pin_user_pages_fast()
 pin_user_pages_remote()

Basic description of FOLL_PIN
=============================

FOLL_PIN and FOLL_LONGTERM are flags that can be passed to the get_user_pages*()
("gup") family of functions. FOLL_PIN has significant interactions and
interdependencies with FOLL_LONGTERM, so both are covered here.

FOLL_PIN is internal to gup, meaning that it should not appear at the gup call
sites. This allows the associated wrapper functions  (pin_user_pages*() and
others) to set the correct combination of these flags, and to check for problems
as well.

FOLL_LONGTERM, on the other hand, *is* allowed to be set at the gup call sites.
This is in order to avoid creating a large number of wrapper functions to cover
all combinations of get*(), pin*(), FOLL_LONGTERM, and more. Also, the
pin_user_pages*() APIs are clearly distinct from the get_user_pages*() APIs, so
that's a natural dividing line, and a good point to make separate wrapper calls.
In other words, use pin_user_pages*() for DMA-pinned pages, and
get_user_pages*() for other cases. There are five cases described later on in
this document, to further clarify that concept.

FOLL_PIN and FOLL_GET are mutually exclusive for a given gup call. However,
multiple threads and call sites are free to pin the same struct pages, via both
FOLL_PIN and FOLL_GET. It's just the call site that needs to choose one or the
other, not the struct page(s).

The FOLL_PIN implementation is nearly the same as FOLL_GET, except that FOLL_PIN
uses a different reference counting technique.

FOLL_PIN is a prerequisite to FOLL_LONGTERM. Another way of saying that is,
FOLL_LONGTERM is a specific case, more restrictive case of FOLL_PIN.

Which flags are set by each wrapper
===================================

For these pin_user_pages*() functions, FOLL_PIN is OR'd in with whatever gup
flags the caller provides. The caller is required to pass in a non-null struct
pages* array, and the function then pins pages by incrementing each by a special
value: GUP_PIN_COUNTING_BIAS.

For large folios, the GUP_PIN_COUNTING_BIAS scheme is not used. Instead,
the extra space available in the struct folio is used to store the
pincount directly.

This approach for large folios avoids the counting upper limit problems
that are discussed below. Those limitations would have been aggravated
severely by huge pages, because each tail page adds a refcount to the
head page. And in fact, testing revealed that, without a separate pincount
field, refcount overflows were seen in some huge page stress tests.

This also means that huge pages and large folios do not suffer
from the false positives problem that is mentioned below.::

 Function
 --------
 pin_user_pages          FOLL_PIN is always set internally by this function.
 pin_user_pages_fast     FOLL_PIN is always set internally by this function.
 pin_user_pages_remote   FOLL_PIN is always set internally by this function.

For these get_user_pages*() functions, FOLL_GET might not even be specified.
Behavior is a little more complex than above. If FOLL_GET was *not* specified,
but the caller passed in a non-null struct pages* array, then the function
sets FOLL_GET for you, and proceeds to pin pages by incrementing the refcount
of each page by +1.::

 Function
 --------
 get_user_pages           FOLL_GET is sometimes set internally by this function.
 get_user_pages_fast      FOLL_GET is sometimes set internally by this function.
 get_user_pages_remote    FOLL_GET is sometimes set internally by this function.

Tracking dma-pinned pages
=========================

Some of the key design constraints, and solutions, for tracking dma-pinned
pages:

* An actual reference count, per struct page, is required. This is because
  multiple processes may pin and unpin a page.

* False positives (reporting that a page is dma-pinned, when in fact it is not)
  are acceptable, but false negatives are not.

* struct page may not be increased in size for this, and all fields are already
  used.

* Given the above, we can overload the page->_refcount field by using, sort of,
  the upper bits in that field for a dma-pinned count. "Sort of", means that,
  rather than dividing page->_refcount into bit fields, we simple add a medium-
  large value (GUP_PIN_COUNTING_BIAS, initially chosen to be 1024: 10 bits) to
  page->_refcount. This provides fuzzy behavior: if a page has get_page() called
  on it 1024 times, then it will appear to have a single dma-pinned count.
  And again, that's acceptable.

This also leads to limitations: there are only 31-10==21 bits available for a
counter that increments 10 bits at a time.

* Because of that limitation, special handling is applied to the zero pages
  when using FOLL_PIN.  We only pretend to pin a zero page - we don't alter its
  refcount or pincount at all (it is permanent, so there's no need).  The
  unpinning functions also don't do anything to a zero page.  This is
  transparent to the caller.

* Callers must specifically request "dma-pinned tracking of pages". In other
  words, just calling get_user_pages() will not suffice; a new set of functions,
  pin_user_page() and related, must be used.

FOLL_PIN, FOLL_GET, FOLL_LONGTERM: when to use which flags
==========================================================

Thanks to Jan Kara, Vlastimil Babka and several other -mm people, for describing
these categories:

CASE 1: Direct IO (DIO)
-----------------------
There are GUP references to pages that are serving
as DIO buffers. These buffers are needed for a relatively short time (so they
are not "long term"). No special synchronization with folio_mkclean() or
munmap() is provided. Therefore, flags to set at the call site are: ::

    FOLL_PIN

...but rather than setting FOLL_PIN directly, call sites should use one of
the pin_user_pages*() routines that set FOLL_PIN.

CASE 2: RDMA
------------
There are GUP references to pages that are serving as DMA
buffers. These buffers are needed for a long time ("long term"). No special
synchronization with folio_mkclean() or munmap() is provided. Therefore, flags
to set at the call site are: ::

    FOLL_PIN | FOLL_LONGTERM

NOTE: Some pages, such as DAX pages, cannot be pinned with longterm pins. That's
because DAX pages do not have a separate page cache, and so "pinning" implies
locking down file system blocks, which is not (yet) supported in that way.

.. _mmu-notifier-registration-case:

CASE 3: MMU notifier registration, with or without page faulting hardware
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Device drivers can pin pages via get_user_pages*(), and register for mmu
notifier callbacks for the memory range. Then, upon receiving a notifier
"invalidate range" callback , stop the device from using the range, and unpin
the pages. There may be other possible schemes, such as for example explicitly
synchronizing against pending IO, that accomplish approximately the same thing.

Or, if the hardware supports replayable page faults, then the device driver can
avoid pinning entirely (this is ideal), as follows: register for mmu notifier
callbacks as above, but instead of stopping the device and unpinning in the
callback, simply remove the range from the device's page tables.

Either way, as long as the driver unpins the pages upon mmu notifier callback,
then there is proper synchronization with both filesystem and mm
(folio_mkclean(), munmap(), etc). Therefore, neither flag needs to be set.

CASE 4: Pinning for struct page manipulation only
-------------------------------------------------
If only struct page data (as opposed to the actual memory contents that a page
is tracking) is affected, then normal GUP calls are sufficient, and neither flag
needs to be set.

CASE 5: Pinning in order to write to the data within the page
-------------------------------------------------------------
Even though neither DMA nor Direct IO is involved, just a simple case of "pin,
write to a page's data, unpin" can cause a problem. Case 5 may be considered a
superset of Case 1, plus Case 2, plus anything that invokes that pattern. In
other words, if the code is neither Case 1 nor Case 2, it may still require
FOLL_PIN, for patterns like this:

Correct (uses FOLL_PIN calls):
    pin_user_pages()
    write to the data within the pages
    unpin_user_pages()

INCORRECT (uses FOLL_GET calls):
    get_user_pages()
    write to the data within the pages
    put_page()

folio_maybe_dma_pinned(): the whole point of pinning
====================================================

The whole point of marking folios as "DMA-pinned" or "gup-pinned" is to be able
to query, "is this folio DMA-pinned?" That allows code such as folio_mkclean()
(and file system writeback code in general) to make informed decisions about
what to do when a folio cannot be unmapped due to such pins.

What to do in those cases is the subject of a years-long series of discussions
and debates (see the References at the end of this document). It's a TODO item
here: fill in the details once that's worked out. Meanwhile, it's safe to say
that having this available: ::

        static inline bool folio_maybe_dma_pinned(struct folio *folio)

...is a prerequisite to solving the long-running gup+DMA problem.

Another way of thinking about FOLL_GET, FOLL_PIN, and FOLL_LONGTERM
===================================================================

Another way of thinking about these flags is as a progression of restrictions:
FOLL_GET is for struct page manipulation, without affecting the data that the
struct page refers to. FOLL_PIN is a *replacement* for FOLL_GET, and is for
short term pins on pages whose data *will* get accessed. As such, FOLL_PIN is
a "more severe" form of pinning. And finally, FOLL_LONGTERM is an even more
restrictive case that has FOLL_PIN as a prerequisite: this is for pages that
will be pinned longterm, and whose data will be accessed.

Unit testing
============
This file::

 tools/testing/selftests/mm/gup_test.c

has the following new calls to exercise the new pin*() wrapper functions:

* PIN_FAST_BENCHMARK (./gup_test -a)
* PIN_BASIC_TEST (./gup_test -b)

You can monitor how many total dma-pinned pages have been acquired and released
since the system was booted, via two new /proc/vmstat entries: ::

    /proc/vmstat/nr_foll_pin_acquired
    /proc/vmstat/nr_foll_pin_released

Under normal conditions, these two values will be equal unless there are any
long-term [R]DMA pins in place, or during pin/unpin transitions.

* nr_foll_pin_acquired: This is the number of logical pins that have been
  acquired since the system was powered on. For huge pages, the head page is
  pinned once for each page (head page and each tail page) within the huge page.
  This follows the same sort of behavior that get_user_pages() uses for huge
  pages: the head page is refcounted once for each tail or head page in the huge
  page, when get_user_pages() is applied to a huge page.

* nr_foll_pin_released: The number of logical pins that have been released since
  the system was powered on. Note that pages are released (unpinned) on a
  PAGE_SIZE granularity, even if the original pin was applied to a huge page.
  Becaused of the pin count behavior described above in "nr_foll_pin_acquired",
  the accounting balances out, so that after doing this::

    pin_user_pages(huge_page);
    for (each page in huge_page)
        unpin_user_page(page);

...the following is expected::

    nr_foll_pin_released == nr_foll_pin_acquired

(...unless it was already out of balance due to a long-term RDMA pin being in
place.)

Other diagnostics
=================

dump_page() has been enhanced slightly to handle these new counting
fields, and to better report on large folios in general.  Specifically,
for large folios, the exact pincount is reported.

References
==========

* `Some slow progress on get_user_pages() (Apr 2, 2019) <https://lwn.net/Articles/784574/>`_
* `DMA and get_user_pages() (LPC: Dec 12, 2018) <https://lwn.net/Articles/774411/>`_
* `The trouble with get_user_pages() (Apr 30, 2018) <https://lwn.net/Articles/753027/>`_
* `LWN kernel index: get_user_pages() <https://lwn.net/Kernel/Index/#Memory_management-get_user_pages>`_

John Hubbard, October, 2019
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===========================
Message logging with printk
===========================

printk() is one of the most widely known functions in the Linux kernel. It's the
standard tool we have for printing messages and usually the most basic way of
tracing and debugging. If you're familiar with printf(3) you can tell printk()
is based on it, although it has some functional differences:

  - printk() messages can specify a log level.

  - the format string, while largely compatible with C99, doesn't follow the
    exact same specification. It has some extensions and a few limitations
    (no ``%n`` or floating point conversion specifiers). See :ref:`How to get
    printk format specifiers right <printk-specifiers>`.

All printk() messages are printed to the kernel log buffer, which is a ring
buffer exported to userspace through /dev/kmsg. The usual way to read it is
using ``dmesg``.

printk() is typically used like this::

  printk(KERN_INFO "Message: %s\n", arg);

where ``KERN_INFO`` is the log level (note that it's concatenated to the format
string, the log level is not a separate argument). The available log levels are:

+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Name           | String |  Alias function                               |
+================+========+===============================================+
| KERN_EMERG     | "0"    | pr_emerg()                                    |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| KERN_ALERT     | "1"    | pr_alert()                                    |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| KERN_CRIT      | "2"    | pr_crit()                                     |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| KERN_ERR       | "3"    | pr_err()                                      |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| KERN_WARNING   | "4"    | pr_warn()                                     |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| KERN_NOTICE    | "5"    | pr_notice()                                   |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| KERN_INFO      | "6"    | pr_info()                                     |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| KERN_DEBUG     | "7"    | pr_debug() and pr_devel() if DEBUG is defined |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| KERN_DEFAULT   | ""     |                                               |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+
| KERN_CONT      | "c"    | pr_cont()                                     |
+----------------+--------+-----------------------------------------------+


The log level specifies the importance of a message. The kernel decides whether
to show the message immediately (printing it to the current console) depending
on its log level and the current *console_loglevel* (a kernel variable). If the
message priority is higher (lower log level value) than the *console_loglevel*
the message will be printed to the console.

If the log level is omitted, the message is printed with ``KERN_DEFAULT``
level.

You can check the current *console_loglevel* with::

  $ cat /proc/sys/kernel/printk
  4        4        1        7

The result shows the *current*, *default*, *minimum* and *boot-time-default* log
levels.

To change the current console_loglevel simply write the desired level to
``/proc/sys/kernel/printk``. For example, to print all messages to the console::

  # echo 8 > /proc/sys/kernel/printk

Another way, using ``dmesg``::

  # dmesg -n 5

sets the console_loglevel to print KERN_WARNING (4) or more severe messages to
console. See ``dmesg(1)`` for more information.

As an alternative to printk() you can use the ``pr_*()`` aliases for
logging. This family of macros embed the log level in the macro names. For
example::

  pr_info("Info message no. %d\n", msg_num);

prints a ``KERN_INFO`` message.

Besides being more concise than the equivalent printk() calls, they can use a
common definition for the format string through the pr_fmt() macro. For
instance, defining this at the top of a source file (before any ``#include``
directive)::

  #define pr_fmt(fmt) "%s:%s: " fmt, KBUILD_MODNAME, __func__

would prefix every pr_*() message in that file with the module and function name
that originated the message.

For debugging purposes there are also two conditionally-compiled macros:
pr_debug() and pr_devel(), which are compiled-out unless ``DEBUG`` (or
also ``CONFIG_DYNAMIC_DEBUG`` in the case of pr_debug()) is defined.


Function reference
==================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/printk.h
   :functions: printk pr_emerg pr_alert pr_crit pr_err pr_warn pr_notice pr_info
      pr_fmt pr_debug pr_devel pr_cont
=========================================
How to get printk format specifiers right
=========================================

.. _printk-specifiers:

:Author: Randy Dunlap <rdunlap@infradead.org>
:Author: Andrew Murray <amurray@mpc-data.co.uk>


Integer types
=============

::

	If variable is of Type,		use printk format specifier:
	------------------------------------------------------------
		signed char		%d or %hhx
		unsigned char		%u or %x
		char			%u or %x
		short int		%d or %hx
		unsigned short int	%u or %x
		int			%d or %x
		unsigned int		%u or %x
		long			%ld or %lx
		unsigned long		%lu or %lx
		long long		%lld or %llx
		unsigned long long	%llu or %llx
		size_t			%zu or %zx
		ssize_t			%zd or %zx
		s8			%d or %hhx
		u8			%u or %x
		s16			%d or %hx
		u16			%u or %x
		s32			%d or %x
		u32			%u or %x
		s64			%lld or %llx
		u64			%llu or %llx


If <type> is architecture-dependent for its size (e.g., cycles_t, tcflag_t) or
is dependent on a config option for its size (e.g., blk_status_t), use a format
specifier of its largest possible type and explicitly cast to it.

Example::

	printk("test: latency: %llu cycles\n", (unsigned long long)time);

Reminder: sizeof() returns type size_t.

The kernel's printf does not support %n. Floating point formats (%e, %f,
%g, %a) are also not recognized, for obvious reasons. Use of any
unsupported specifier or length qualifier results in a WARN and early
return from vsnprintf().

Pointer types
=============

A raw pointer value may be printed with %p which will hash the address
before printing. The kernel also supports extended specifiers for printing
pointers of different types.

Some of the extended specifiers print the data on the given address instead
of printing the address itself. In this case, the following error messages
might be printed instead of the unreachable information::

	(null)	 data on plain NULL address
	(efault) data on invalid address
	(einval) invalid data on a valid address

Plain Pointers
--------------

::

	%p	abcdef12 or 00000000abcdef12

Pointers printed without a specifier extension (i.e unadorned %p) are
hashed to prevent leaking information about the kernel memory layout. This
has the added benefit of providing a unique identifier. On 64-bit machines
the first 32 bits are zeroed. The kernel will print ``(ptrval)`` until it
gathers enough entropy.

When possible, use specialised modifiers such as %pS or %pB (described below)
to avoid the need of providing an unhashed address that has to be interpreted
post-hoc. If not possible, and the aim of printing the address is to provide
more information for debugging, use %p and boot the kernel with the
``no_hash_pointers`` parameter during debugging, which will print all %p
addresses unmodified. If you *really* always want the unmodified address, see
%px below.

If (and only if) you are printing addresses as a content of a virtual file in
e.g. procfs or sysfs (using e.g. seq_printf(), not printk()) read by a
userspace process, use the %pK modifier described below instead of %p or %px.

Error Pointers
--------------

::

	%pe	-ENOSPC

For printing error pointers (i.e. a pointer for which IS_ERR() is true)
as a symbolic error name. Error values for which no symbolic name is
known are printed in decimal, while a non-ERR_PTR passed as the
argument to %pe gets treated as ordinary %p.

Symbols/Function Pointers
-------------------------

::

	%pS	versatile_init+0x0/0x110
	%ps	versatile_init
	%pSR	versatile_init+0x9/0x110
		(with __builtin_extract_return_addr() translation)
	%pB	prev_fn_of_versatile_init+0x88/0x88


The ``S`` and ``s`` specifiers are used for printing a pointer in symbolic
format. They result in the symbol name with (S) or without (s)
offsets. If KALLSYMS are disabled then the symbol address is printed instead.

The ``B`` specifier results in the symbol name with offsets and should be
used when printing stack backtraces. The specifier takes into
consideration the effect of compiler optimisations which may occur
when tail-calls are used and marked with the noreturn GCC attribute.

If the pointer is within a module, the module name and optionally build ID is
printed after the symbol name with an extra ``b`` appended to the end of the
specifier.

::

	%pS	versatile_init+0x0/0x110 [module_name]
	%pSb	versatile_init+0x0/0x110 [module_name ed5019fdf5e53be37cb1ba7899292d7e143b259e]
	%pSRb	versatile_init+0x9/0x110 [module_name ed5019fdf5e53be37cb1ba7899292d7e143b259e]
		(with __builtin_extract_return_addr() translation)
	%pBb	prev_fn_of_versatile_init+0x88/0x88 [module_name ed5019fdf5e53be37cb1ba7899292d7e143b259e]

Probed Pointers from BPF / tracing
----------------------------------

::

	%pks	kernel string
	%pus	user string

The ``k`` and ``u`` specifiers are used for printing prior probed memory from
either kernel memory (k) or user memory (u). The subsequent ``s`` specifier
results in printing a string. For direct use in regular vsnprintf() the (k)
and (u) annotation is ignored, however, when used out of BPF's bpf_trace_printk(),
for example, it reads the memory it is pointing to without faulting.

Kernel Pointers
---------------

::

	%pK	01234567 or 0123456789abcdef

For printing kernel pointers which should be hidden from unprivileged
users. The behaviour of %pK depends on the kptr_restrict sysctl - see
Documentation/admin-guide/sysctl/kernel.rst for more details.

This modifier is *only* intended when producing content of a file read by
userspace from e.g. procfs or sysfs, not for dmesg. Please refer to the
section about %p above for discussion about how to manage hashing pointers
in printk().

Unmodified Addresses
--------------------

::

	%px	01234567 or 0123456789abcdef

For printing pointers when you *really* want to print the address. Please
consider whether or not you are leaking sensitive information about the
kernel memory layout before printing pointers with %px. %px is functionally
equivalent to %lx (or %lu). %px is preferred because it is more uniquely
grep'able. If in the future we need to modify the way the kernel handles
printing pointers we will be better equipped to find the call sites.

Before using %px, consider if using %p is sufficient together with enabling the
``no_hash_pointers`` kernel parameter during debugging sessions (see the %p
description above). One valid scenario for %px might be printing information
immediately before a panic, which prevents any sensitive information to be
exploited anyway, and with %px there would be no need to reproduce the panic
with no_hash_pointers.

Pointer Differences
-------------------

::

	%td	2560
	%tx	a00

For printing the pointer differences, use the %t modifier for ptrdiff_t.

Example::

	printk("test: difference between pointers: %td\n", ptr2 - ptr1);

Struct Resources
----------------

::

	%pr	[mem 0x60000000-0x6fffffff flags 0x2200] or
		[mem 0x0000000060000000-0x000000006fffffff flags 0x2200]
	%pR	[mem 0x60000000-0x6fffffff pref] or
		[mem 0x0000000060000000-0x000000006fffffff pref]

For printing struct resources. The ``R`` and ``r`` specifiers result in a
printed resource with (R) or without (r) a decoded flags member.

Passed by reference.

Physical address types phys_addr_t
----------------------------------

::

	%pa[p]	0x01234567 or 0x0123456789abcdef

For printing a phys_addr_t type (and its derivatives, such as
resource_size_t) which can vary based on build options, regardless of the
width of the CPU data path.

Passed by reference.

DMA address types dma_addr_t
----------------------------

::

	%pad	0x01234567 or 0x0123456789abcdef

For printing a dma_addr_t type which can vary based on build options,
regardless of the width of the CPU data path.

Passed by reference.

Raw buffer as an escaped string
-------------------------------

::

	%*pE[achnops]

For printing raw buffer as an escaped string. For the following buffer::

		1b 62 20 5c 43 07 22 90 0d 5d

A few examples show how the conversion would be done (excluding surrounding
quotes)::

		%*pE		"\eb \C\a"\220\r]"
		%*pEhp		"\x1bb \C\x07"\x90\x0d]"
		%*pEa		"\e\142\040\\\103\a\042\220\r\135"

The conversion rules are applied according to an optional combination
of flags (see :c:func:`string_escape_mem` kernel documentation for the
details):

	- a - ESCAPE_ANY
	- c - ESCAPE_SPECIAL
	- h - ESCAPE_HEX
	- n - ESCAPE_NULL
	- o - ESCAPE_OCTAL
	- p - ESCAPE_NP
	- s - ESCAPE_SPACE

By default ESCAPE_ANY_NP is used.

ESCAPE_ANY_NP is the sane choice for many cases, in particularly for
printing SSIDs.

If field width is omitted then 1 byte only will be escaped.

Raw buffer as a hex string
--------------------------

::

	%*ph	00 01 02  ...  3f
	%*phC	00:01:02: ... :3f
	%*phD	00-01-02- ... -3f
	%*phN	000102 ... 3f

For printing small buffers (up to 64 bytes long) as a hex string with a
certain separator. For larger buffers consider using
:c:func:`print_hex_dump`.

MAC/FDDI addresses
------------------

::

	%pM	00:01:02:03:04:05
	%pMR	05:04:03:02:01:00
	%pMF	00-01-02-03-04-05
	%pm	000102030405
	%pmR	050403020100

For printing 6-byte MAC/FDDI addresses in hex notation. The ``M`` and ``m``
specifiers result in a printed address with (M) or without (m) byte
separators. The default byte separator is the colon (:).

Where FDDI addresses are concerned the ``F`` specifier can be used after
the ``M`` specifier to use dash (-) separators instead of the default
separator.

For Bluetooth addresses the ``R`` specifier shall be used after the ``M``
specifier to use reversed byte order suitable for visual interpretation
of Bluetooth addresses which are in the little endian order.

Passed by reference.

IPv4 addresses
--------------

::

	%pI4	1.2.3.4
	%pi4	001.002.003.004
	%p[Ii]4[hnbl]

For printing IPv4 dot-separated decimal addresses. The ``I4`` and ``i4``
specifiers result in a printed address with (i4) or without (I4) leading
zeros.

The additional ``h``, ``n``, ``b``, and ``l`` specifiers are used to specify
host, network, big or little endian order addresses respectively. Where
no specifier is provided the default network/big endian order is used.

Passed by reference.

IPv6 addresses
--------------

::

	%pI6	0001:0002:0003:0004:0005:0006:0007:0008
	%pi6	00010002000300040005000600070008
	%pI6c	1:2:3:4:5:6:7:8

For printing IPv6 network-order 16-bit hex addresses. The ``I6`` and ``i6``
specifiers result in a printed address with (I6) or without (i6)
colon-separators. Leading zeros are always used.

The additional ``c`` specifier can be used with the ``I`` specifier to
print a compressed IPv6 address as described by
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5952

Passed by reference.

IPv4/IPv6 addresses (generic, with port, flowinfo, scope)
---------------------------------------------------------

::

	%pIS	1.2.3.4		or 0001:0002:0003:0004:0005:0006:0007:0008
	%piS	001.002.003.004	or 00010002000300040005000600070008
	%pISc	1.2.3.4		or 1:2:3:4:5:6:7:8
	%pISpc	1.2.3.4:12345	or [1:2:3:4:5:6:7:8]:12345
	%p[Ii]S[pfschnbl]

For printing an IP address without the need to distinguish whether it's of
type AF_INET or AF_INET6. A pointer to a valid struct sockaddr,
specified through ``IS`` or ``iS``, can be passed to this format specifier.

The additional ``p``, ``f``, and ``s`` specifiers are used to specify port
(IPv4, IPv6), flowinfo (IPv6) and scope (IPv6). Ports have a ``:`` prefix,
flowinfo a ``/`` and scope a ``%``, each followed by the actual value.

In case of an IPv6 address the compressed IPv6 address as described by
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5952 is being used if the additional
specifier ``c`` is given. The IPv6 address is surrounded by ``[``, ``]`` in
case of additional specifiers ``p``, ``f`` or ``s`` as suggested by
https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-6man-text-addr-representation-07

In case of IPv4 addresses, the additional ``h``, ``n``, ``b``, and ``l``
specifiers can be used as well and are ignored in case of an IPv6
address.

Passed by reference.

Further examples::

	%pISfc		1.2.3.4		or [1:2:3:4:5:6:7:8]/123456789
	%pISsc		1.2.3.4		or [1:2:3:4:5:6:7:8]%1234567890
	%pISpfc		1.2.3.4:12345	or [1:2:3:4:5:6:7:8]:12345/123456789

UUID/GUID addresses
-------------------

::

	%pUb	00010203-0405-0607-0809-0a0b0c0d0e0f
	%pUB	00010203-0405-0607-0809-0A0B0C0D0E0F
	%pUl	03020100-0504-0706-0809-0a0b0c0e0e0f
	%pUL	03020100-0504-0706-0809-0A0B0C0E0E0F

For printing 16-byte UUID/GUIDs addresses. The additional ``l``, ``L``,
``b`` and ``B`` specifiers are used to specify a little endian order in
lower (l) or upper case (L) hex notation - and big endian order in lower (b)
or upper case (B) hex notation.

Where no additional specifiers are used the default big endian
order with lower case hex notation will be printed.

Passed by reference.

dentry names
------------

::

	%pd{,2,3,4}
	%pD{,2,3,4}

For printing dentry name; if we race with :c:func:`d_move`, the name might
be a mix of old and new ones, but it won't oops.  %pd dentry is a safer
equivalent of %s dentry->d_name.name we used to use, %pd<n> prints ``n``
last components.  %pD does the same thing for struct file.

Passed by reference.

block_device names
------------------

::

	%pg	sda, sda1 or loop0p1

For printing name of block_device pointers.

struct va_format
----------------

::

	%pV

For printing struct va_format structures. These contain a format string
and va_list as follows::

	struct va_format {
		const char *fmt;
		va_list *va;
	};

Implements a "recursive vsnprintf".

Do not use this feature without some mechanism to verify the
correctness of the format string and va_list arguments.

Passed by reference.

Device tree nodes
-----------------

::

	%pOF[fnpPcCF]


For printing device tree node structures. Default behaviour is
equivalent to %pOFf.

	- f - device node full_name
	- n - device node name
	- p - device node phandle
	- P - device node path spec (name + @unit)
	- F - device node flags
	- c - major compatible string
	- C - full compatible string

The separator when using multiple arguments is ':'

Examples::

	%pOF	/foo/bar@0			- Node full name
	%pOFf	/foo/bar@0			- Same as above
	%pOFfp	/foo/bar@0:10			- Node full name + phandle
	%pOFfcF	/foo/bar@0:foo,device:--P-	- Node full name +
	                                          major compatible string +
						  node flags
							D - dynamic
							d - detached
							P - Populated
							B - Populated bus

Passed by reference.

Fwnode handles
--------------

::

	%pfw[fP]

For printing information on fwnode handles. The default is to print the full
node name, including the path. The modifiers are functionally equivalent to
%pOF above.

	- f - full name of the node, including the path
	- P - the name of the node including an address (if there is one)

Examples (ACPI)::

	%pfwf	\_SB.PCI0.CIO2.port@1.endpoint@0	- Full node name
	%pfwP	endpoint@0				- Node name

Examples (OF)::

	%pfwf	/ocp@68000000/i2c@48072000/camera@10/port/endpoint - Full name
	%pfwP	endpoint				- Node name

Time and date
-------------

::

	%pt[RT]			YYYY-mm-ddTHH:MM:SS
	%pt[RT]s		YYYY-mm-dd HH:MM:SS
	%pt[RT]d		YYYY-mm-dd
	%pt[RT]t		HH:MM:SS
	%pt[RT][dt][r][s]

For printing date and time as represented by::

	R  struct rtc_time structure
	T  time64_t type

in human readable format.

By default year will be incremented by 1900 and month by 1.
Use %pt[RT]r (raw) to suppress this behaviour.

The %pt[RT]s (space) will override ISO 8601 separator by using ' ' (space)
instead of 'T' (Capital T) between date and time. It won't have any effect
when date or time is omitted.

Passed by reference.

struct clk
----------

::

	%pC	pll1
	%pCn	pll1

For printing struct clk structures. %pC and %pCn print the name of the clock
(Common Clock Framework) or a unique 32-bit ID (legacy clock framework).

Passed by reference.

bitmap and its derivatives such as cpumask and nodemask
-------------------------------------------------------

::

	%*pb	0779
	%*pbl	0,3-6,8-10

For printing bitmap and its derivatives such as cpumask and nodemask,
%*pb outputs the bitmap with field width as the number of bits and %*pbl
output the bitmap as range list with field width as the number of bits.

The field width is passed by value, the bitmap is passed by reference.
Helper macros cpumask_pr_args() and nodemask_pr_args() are available to ease
printing cpumask and nodemask.

Flags bitfields such as page flags and gfp_flags
--------------------------------------------------------

::

	%pGp	0x17ffffc0002036(referenced|uptodate|lru|active|private|node=0|zone=2|lastcpupid=0x1fffff)
	%pGg	GFP_USER|GFP_DMA32|GFP_NOWARN
	%pGv	read|exec|mayread|maywrite|mayexec|denywrite

For printing flags bitfields as a collection of symbolic constants that
would construct the value. The type of flags is given by the third
character. Currently supported are:

        - p - [p]age flags, expects value of type (``unsigned long *``)
        - v - [v]ma_flags, expects value of type (``unsigned long *``)
        - g - [g]fp_flags, expects value of type (``gfp_t *``)

The flag names and print order depends on the particular type.

Note that this format should not be used directly in the
:c:func:`TP_printk()` part of a tracepoint. Instead, use the show_*_flags()
functions from <trace/events/mmflags.h>.

Passed by reference.

Network device features
-----------------------

::

	%pNF	0x000000000000c000

For printing netdev_features_t.

Passed by reference.

V4L2 and DRM FourCC code (pixel format)
---------------------------------------

::

	%p4cc

Print a FourCC code used by V4L2 or DRM, including format endianness and
its numerical value as hexadecimal.

Passed by reference.

Examples::

	%p4cc	BG12 little-endian (0x32314742)
	%p4cc	Y10  little-endian (0x20303159)
	%p4cc	NV12 big-endian (0xb231564e)

Rust
----

::

	%pA

Only intended to be used from Rust code to format ``core::fmt::Arguments``.
Do *not* use it from C.

Thanks
======

If you add other %p extensions, please extend <lib/test_printf.c> with
one or more test cases, if at all feasible.

Thank you for your cooperation and attention.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

============
Printk Index
============

There are many ways to monitor the state of the system. One important
source of information is the system log. It provides a lot of information,
including more or less important warnings and error messages.

There are monitoring tools that filter and take action based on messages
logged.

The kernel messages are evolving together with the code. As a result,
particular kernel messages are not KABI and never will be!

It is a huge challenge for maintaining the system log monitors. It requires
knowing what messages were updated in a particular kernel version and why.
Finding these changes in the sources would require non-trivial parsers.
Also it would require matching the sources with the binary kernel which
is not always trivial. Various changes might be backported. Various kernel
versions might be used on different monitored systems.

This is where the printk index feature might become useful. It provides
a dump of printk formats used all over the source code used for the kernel
and modules on the running system. It is accessible at runtime via debugfs.

The printk index helps to find changes in the message formats. Also it helps
to track the strings back to the kernel sources and the related commit.


User Interface
==============

The index of printk formats are split in into separate files. The files are
named according to the binaries where the printk formats are built-in. There
is always "vmlinux" and optionally also modules, for example::

   /sys/kernel/debug/printk/index/vmlinux
   /sys/kernel/debug/printk/index/ext4
   /sys/kernel/debug/printk/index/scsi_mod

Note that only loaded modules are shown. Also printk formats from a module
might appear in "vmlinux" when the module is built-in.

The content is inspired by the dynamic debug interface and looks like::

   $> head -1 /sys/kernel/debug/printk/index/vmlinux; shuf -n 5 vmlinux
   # <level[,flags]> filename:line function "format"
   <5> block/blk-settings.c:661 disk_stack_limits "%s: Warning: Device %s is misaligned\n"
   <4> kernel/trace/trace.c:8296 trace_create_file "Could not create tracefs '%s' entry\n"
   <6> arch/x86/kernel/hpet.c:144 _hpet_print_config "hpet: %s(%d):\n"
   <6> init/do_mounts.c:605 prepare_namespace "Waiting for root device %s...\n"
   <6> drivers/acpi/osl.c:1410 acpi_no_auto_serialize_setup "ACPI: auto-serialization disabled\n"

, where the meaning is:

   - :level: log level value: 0-7 for particular severity, -1 as default,
	'c' as continuous line without an explicit log level
   - :flags: optional flags: currently only 'c' for KERN_CONT
   - :filename\:line: source filename and line number of the related
	printk() call. Note that there are many wrappers, for example,
	pr_warn(), pr_warn_once(), dev_warn().
   - :function: function name where the printk() call is used.
   - :format: format string

The extra information makes it a bit harder to find differences
between various kernels. Especially the line number might change
very often. On the other hand, it helps a lot to confirm that
it is the same string or find the commit that is responsible
for eventual changes.


printk() Is Not a Stable KABI
=============================

Several developers are afraid that exporting all these implementation
details into the user space will transform particular printk() calls
into KABI.

But it is exactly the opposite. printk() calls must _not_ be KABI.
And the printk index helps user space tools to deal with this.


Subsystem specific printk wrappers
==================================

The printk index is generated using extra metadata that are stored in
a dedicated .elf section ".printk_index". It is achieved using macro
wrappers doing __printk_index_emit() together with the real printk()
call. The same technique is used also for the metadata used by
the dynamic debug feature.

The metadata are stored for a particular message only when it is printed
using these special wrappers. It is implemented for the commonly
used printk() calls, including, for example, pr_warn(), or pr_once().

Additional changes are necessary for various subsystem specific wrappers
that call the original printk() via a common helper function. These needs
their own wrappers adding __printk_index_emit().

Only few subsystem specific wrappers have been updated so far,
for example, dev_printk(). As a result, the printk formats from
some subsystems can be missing in the printk index.


Subsystem specific prefix
=========================

The macro pr_fmt() macro allows to define a prefix that is printed
before the string generated by the related printk() calls.

Subsystem specific wrappers usually add even more complicated
prefixes.

These prefixes can be stored into the printk index metadata
by an optional parameter of __printk_index_emit(). The debugfs
interface might then show the printk formats including these prefixes.
For example, drivers/acpi/osl.c contains::

  #define pr_fmt(fmt) "ACPI: OSL: " fmt

  static int __init acpi_no_auto_serialize_setup(char *str)
  {
	acpi_gbl_auto_serialize_methods = FALSE;
	pr_info("Auto-serialization disabled\n");

	return 1;
  }

This results in the following printk index entry::

  <6> drivers/acpi/osl.c:1410 acpi_no_auto_serialize_setup "ACPI: auto-serialization disabled\n"

It helps matching messages from the real log with printk index.
Then the source file name, line number, and function name can
be used to match the string with the source code.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

======================
Memory Protection Keys
======================

Memory Protection Keys provide a mechanism for enforcing page-based
protections, but without requiring modification of the page tables when an
application changes protection domains.

Pkeys Userspace (PKU) is a feature which can be found on:
        * Intel server CPUs, Skylake and later
        * Intel client CPUs, Tiger Lake (11th Gen Core) and later
        * Future AMD CPUs
        * arm64 CPUs implementing the Permission Overlay Extension (FEAT_S1POE)

x86_64
======
Pkeys work by dedicating 4 previously Reserved bits in each page table entry to
a "protection key", giving 16 possible keys.

Protections for each key are defined with a per-CPU user-accessible register
(PKRU).  Each of these is a 32-bit register storing two bits (Access Disable
and Write Disable) for each of 16 keys.

Being a CPU register, PKRU is inherently thread-local, potentially giving each
thread a different set of protections from every other thread.

There are two instructions (RDPKRU/WRPKRU) for reading and writing to the
register.  The feature is only available in 64-bit mode, even though there is
theoretically space in the PAE PTEs.  These permissions are enforced on data
access only and have no effect on instruction fetches.

arm64
=====

Pkeys use 3 bits in each page table entry, to encode a "protection key index",
giving 8 possible keys.

Protections for each key are defined with a per-CPU user-writable system
register (POR_EL0).  This is a 64-bit register encoding read, write and execute
overlay permissions for each protection key index.

Being a CPU register, POR_EL0 is inherently thread-local, potentially giving
each thread a different set of protections from every other thread.

Unlike x86_64, the protection key permissions also apply to instruction
fetches.

Syscalls
========

There are 3 system calls which directly interact with pkeys::

	int pkey_alloc(unsigned long flags, unsigned long init_access_rights)
	int pkey_free(int pkey);
	int pkey_mprotect(unsigned long start, size_t len,
			  unsigned long prot, int pkey);

Before a pkey can be used, it must first be allocated with pkey_alloc().  An
application writes to the architecture specific CPU register directly in order
to change access permissions to memory covered with a key.  In this example
this is wrapped by a C function called pkey_set().
::

	int real_prot = PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE;
	pkey = pkey_alloc(0, PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE);
	ptr = mmap(NULL, PAGE_SIZE, PROT_NONE, MAP_ANONYMOUS|MAP_PRIVATE, -1, 0);
	ret = pkey_mprotect(ptr, PAGE_SIZE, real_prot, pkey);
	... application runs here

Now, if the application needs to update the data at 'ptr', it can
gain access, do the update, then remove its write access::

	pkey_set(pkey, 0); // clear PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE
	*ptr = foo; // assign something
	pkey_set(pkey, PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE); // set PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE again

Now when it frees the memory, it will also free the pkey since it
is no longer in use::

	munmap(ptr, PAGE_SIZE);
	pkey_free(pkey);

.. note:: pkey_set() is a wrapper around writing to the CPU register.
          Example implementations can be found in
          tools/testing/selftests/mm/pkey-{arm64,powerpc,x86}.h

Behavior
========

The kernel attempts to make protection keys consistent with the
behavior of a plain mprotect().  For instance if you do this::

	mprotect(ptr, size, PROT_NONE);
	something(ptr);

you can expect the same effects with protection keys when doing this::

	pkey = pkey_alloc(0, PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE | PKEY_DISABLE_READ);
	pkey_mprotect(ptr, size, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE, pkey);
	something(ptr);

That should be true whether something() is a direct access to 'ptr'
like::

	*ptr = foo;

or when the kernel does the access on the application's behalf like
with a read()::

	read(fd, ptr, 1);

The kernel will send a SIGSEGV in both cases, but si_code will be set
to SEGV_PKERR when violating protection keys versus SEGV_ACCERR when
the plain mprotect() permissions are violated.

Note that kernel accesses from a kthread (such as io_uring) will use a default
value for the protection key register and so will not be consistent with
userspace's value of the register or mprotect().
=================================
Red-black Trees (rbtree) in Linux
=================================


:Date: January 18, 2007
:Author: Rob Landley <rob@landley.net>

What are red-black trees, and what are they for?
------------------------------------------------

Red-black trees are a type of self-balancing binary search tree, used for
storing sortable key/value data pairs.  This differs from radix trees (which
are used to efficiently store sparse arrays and thus use long integer indexes
to insert/access/delete nodes) and hash tables (which are not kept sorted to
be easily traversed in order, and must be tuned for a specific size and
hash function where rbtrees scale gracefully storing arbitrary keys).

Red-black trees are similar to AVL trees, but provide faster real-time bounded
worst case performance for insertion and deletion (at most two rotations and
three rotations, respectively, to balance the tree), with slightly slower
(but still O(log n)) lookup time.

To quote Linux Weekly News:

    There are a number of red-black trees in use in the kernel.
    The deadline and CFQ I/O schedulers employ rbtrees to
    track requests; the packet CD/DVD driver does the same.
    The high-resolution timer code uses an rbtree to organize outstanding
    timer requests.  The ext3 filesystem tracks directory entries in a
    red-black tree.  Virtual memory areas (VMAs) are tracked with red-black
    trees, as are epoll file descriptors, cryptographic keys, and network
    packets in the "hierarchical token bucket" scheduler.

This document covers use of the Linux rbtree implementation.  For more
information on the nature and implementation of Red Black Trees,  see:

  Linux Weekly News article on red-black trees
    https://lwn.net/Articles/184495/

  Wikipedia entry on red-black trees
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red-black_tree

Linux implementation of red-black trees
---------------------------------------

Linux's rbtree implementation lives in the file "lib/rbtree.c".  To use it,
"#include <linux/rbtree.h>".

The Linux rbtree implementation is optimized for speed, and thus has one
less layer of indirection (and better cache locality) than more traditional
tree implementations.  Instead of using pointers to separate rb_node and data
structures, each instance of struct rb_node is embedded in the data structure
it organizes.  And instead of using a comparison callback function pointer,
users are expected to write their own tree search and insert functions
which call the provided rbtree functions.  Locking is also left up to the
user of the rbtree code.

Creating a new rbtree
---------------------

Data nodes in an rbtree tree are structures containing a struct rb_node member::

  struct mytype {
  	struct rb_node node;
  	char *keystring;
  };

When dealing with a pointer to the embedded struct rb_node, the containing data
structure may be accessed with the standard container_of() macro.  In addition,
individual members may be accessed directly via rb_entry(node, type, member).

At the root of each rbtree is an rb_root structure, which is initialized to be
empty via:

  struct rb_root mytree = RB_ROOT;

Searching for a value in an rbtree
----------------------------------

Writing a search function for your tree is fairly straightforward: start at the
root, compare each value, and follow the left or right branch as necessary.

Example::

  struct mytype *my_search(struct rb_root *root, char *string)
  {
  	struct rb_node *node = root->rb_node;

  	while (node) {
  		struct mytype *data = container_of(node, struct mytype, node);
		int result;

		result = strcmp(string, data->keystring);

		if (result < 0)
  			node = node->rb_left;
		else if (result > 0)
  			node = node->rb_right;
		else
  			return data;
	}
	return NULL;
  }

Inserting data into an rbtree
-----------------------------

Inserting data in the tree involves first searching for the place to insert the
new node, then inserting the node and rebalancing ("recoloring") the tree.

The search for insertion differs from the previous search by finding the
location of the pointer on which to graft the new node.  The new node also
needs a link to its parent node for rebalancing purposes.

Example::

  int my_insert(struct rb_root *root, struct mytype *data)
  {
  	struct rb_node **new = &(root->rb_node), *parent = NULL;

  	/* Figure out where to put new node */
  	while (*new) {
  		struct mytype *this = container_of(*new, struct mytype, node);
  		int result = strcmp(data->keystring, this->keystring);

		parent = *new;
  		if (result < 0)
  			new = &((*new)->rb_left);
  		else if (result > 0)
  			new = &((*new)->rb_right);
  		else
  			return FALSE;
  	}

  	/* Add new node and rebalance tree. */
  	rb_link_node(&data->node, parent, new);
  	rb_insert_color(&data->node, root);

	return TRUE;
  }

Removing or replacing existing data in an rbtree
------------------------------------------------

To remove an existing node from a tree, call::

  void rb_erase(struct rb_node *victim, struct rb_root *tree);

Example::

  struct mytype *data = mysearch(&mytree, "walrus");

  if (data) {
  	rb_erase(&data->node, &mytree);
  	myfree(data);
  }

To replace an existing node in a tree with a new one with the same key, call::

  void rb_replace_node(struct rb_node *old, struct rb_node *new,
  			struct rb_root *tree);

Replacing a node this way does not re-sort the tree: If the new node doesn't
have the same key as the old node, the rbtree will probably become corrupted.

Iterating through the elements stored in an rbtree (in sort order)
------------------------------------------------------------------

Four functions are provided for iterating through an rbtree's contents in
sorted order.  These work on arbitrary trees, and should not need to be
modified or wrapped (except for locking purposes)::

  struct rb_node *rb_first(struct rb_root *tree);
  struct rb_node *rb_last(struct rb_root *tree);
  struct rb_node *rb_next(struct rb_node *node);
  struct rb_node *rb_prev(struct rb_node *node);

To start iterating, call rb_first() or rb_last() with a pointer to the root
of the tree, which will return a pointer to the node structure contained in
the first or last element in the tree.  To continue, fetch the next or previous
node by calling rb_next() or rb_prev() on the current node.  This will return
NULL when there are no more nodes left.

The iterator functions return a pointer to the embedded struct rb_node, from
which the containing data structure may be accessed with the container_of()
macro, and individual members may be accessed directly via
rb_entry(node, type, member).

Example::

  struct rb_node *node;
  for (node = rb_first(&mytree); node; node = rb_next(node))
	printk("key=%s\n", rb_entry(node, struct mytype, node)->keystring);

Cached rbtrees
--------------

Computing the leftmost (smallest) node is quite a common task for binary
search trees, such as for traversals or users relying on a the particular
order for their own logic. To this end, users can use 'struct rb_root_cached'
to optimize O(logN) rb_first() calls to a simple pointer fetch avoiding
potentially expensive tree iterations. This is done at negligible runtime
overhead for maintenance; albeit larger memory footprint.

Similar to the rb_root structure, cached rbtrees are initialized to be
empty via::

  struct rb_root_cached mytree = RB_ROOT_CACHED;

Cached rbtree is simply a regular rb_root with an extra pointer to cache the
leftmost node. This allows rb_root_cached to exist wherever rb_root does,
which permits augmented trees to be supported as well as only a few extra
interfaces::

  struct rb_node *rb_first_cached(struct rb_root_cached *tree);
  void rb_insert_color_cached(struct rb_node *, struct rb_root_cached *, bool);
  void rb_erase_cached(struct rb_node *node, struct rb_root_cached *);

Both insert and erase calls have their respective counterpart of augmented
trees::

  void rb_insert_augmented_cached(struct rb_node *node, struct rb_root_cached *,
				  bool, struct rb_augment_callbacks *);
  void rb_erase_augmented_cached(struct rb_node *, struct rb_root_cached *,
				 struct rb_augment_callbacks *);


Support for Augmented rbtrees
-----------------------------

Augmented rbtree is an rbtree with "some" additional data stored in
each node, where the additional data for node N must be a function of
the contents of all nodes in the subtree rooted at N. This data can
be used to augment some new functionality to rbtree. Augmented rbtree
is an optional feature built on top of basic rbtree infrastructure.
An rbtree user who wants this feature will have to call the augmentation
functions with the user provided augmentation callback when inserting
and erasing nodes.

C files implementing augmented rbtree manipulation must include
<linux/rbtree_augmented.h> instead of <linux/rbtree.h>. Note that
linux/rbtree_augmented.h exposes some rbtree implementations details
you are not expected to rely on; please stick to the documented APIs
there and do not include <linux/rbtree_augmented.h> from header files
either so as to minimize chances of your users accidentally relying on
such implementation details.

On insertion, the user must update the augmented information on the path
leading to the inserted node, then call rb_link_node() as usual and
rb_augment_inserted() instead of the usual rb_insert_color() call.
If rb_augment_inserted() rebalances the rbtree, it will callback into
a user provided function to update the augmented information on the
affected subtrees.

When erasing a node, the user must call rb_erase_augmented() instead of
rb_erase(). rb_erase_augmented() calls back into user provided functions
to updated the augmented information on affected subtrees.

In both cases, the callbacks are provided through struct rb_augment_callbacks.
3 callbacks must be defined:

- A propagation callback, which updates the augmented value for a given
  node and its ancestors, up to a given stop point (or NULL to update
  all the way to the root).

- A copy callback, which copies the augmented value for a given subtree
  to a newly assigned subtree root.

- A tree rotation callback, which copies the augmented value for a given
  subtree to a newly assigned subtree root AND recomputes the augmented
  information for the former subtree root.

The compiled code for rb_erase_augmented() may inline the propagation and
copy callbacks, which results in a large function, so each augmented rbtree
user should have a single rb_erase_augmented() call site in order to limit
compiled code size.


Sample usage
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Interval tree is an example of augmented rb tree. Reference -
"Introduction to Algorithms" by Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest and Stein.
More details about interval trees:

Classical rbtree has a single key and it cannot be directly used to store
interval ranges like [lo:hi] and do a quick lookup for any overlap with a new
lo:hi or to find whether there is an exact match for a new lo:hi.

However, rbtree can be augmented to store such interval ranges in a structured
way making it possible to do efficient lookup and exact match.

This "extra information" stored in each node is the maximum hi
(max_hi) value among all the nodes that are its descendants. This
information can be maintained at each node just be looking at the node
and its immediate children. And this will be used in O(log n) lookup
for lowest match (lowest start address among all possible matches)
with something like::

  struct interval_tree_node *
  interval_tree_first_match(struct rb_root *root,
			    unsigned long start, unsigned long last)
  {
	struct interval_tree_node *node;

	if (!root->rb_node)
		return NULL;
	node = rb_entry(root->rb_node, struct interval_tree_node, rb);

	while (true) {
		if (node->rb.rb_left) {
			struct interval_tree_node *left =
				rb_entry(node->rb.rb_left,
					 struct interval_tree_node, rb);
			if (left->__subtree_last >= start) {
				/*
				 * Some nodes in left subtree satisfy Cond2.
				 * Iterate to find the leftmost such node N.
				 * If it also satisfies Cond1, that's the match
				 * we are looking for. Otherwise, there is no
				 * matching interval as nodes to the right of N
				 * can't satisfy Cond1 either.
				 */
				node = left;
				continue;
			}
		}
		if (node->start <= last) {		/* Cond1 */
			if (node->last >= start)	/* Cond2 */
				return node;	/* node is leftmost match */
			if (node->rb.rb_right) {
				node = rb_entry(node->rb.rb_right,
					struct interval_tree_node, rb);
				if (node->__subtree_last >= start)
					continue;
			}
		}
		return NULL;	/* No match */
	}
  }

Insertion/removal are defined using the following augmented callbacks::

  static inline unsigned long
  compute_subtree_last(struct interval_tree_node *node)
  {
	unsigned long max = node->last, subtree_last;
	if (node->rb.rb_left) {
		subtree_last = rb_entry(node->rb.rb_left,
			struct interval_tree_node, rb)->__subtree_last;
		if (max < subtree_last)
			max = subtree_last;
	}
	if (node->rb.rb_right) {
		subtree_last = rb_entry(node->rb.rb_right,
			struct interval_tree_node, rb)->__subtree_last;
		if (max < subtree_last)
			max = subtree_last;
	}
	return max;
  }

  static void augment_propagate(struct rb_node *rb, struct rb_node *stop)
  {
	while (rb != stop) {
		struct interval_tree_node *node =
			rb_entry(rb, struct interval_tree_node, rb);
		unsigned long subtree_last = compute_subtree_last(node);
		if (node->__subtree_last == subtree_last)
			break;
		node->__subtree_last = subtree_last;
		rb = rb_parent(&node->rb);
	}
  }

  static void augment_copy(struct rb_node *rb_old, struct rb_node *rb_new)
  {
	struct interval_tree_node *old =
		rb_entry(rb_old, struct interval_tree_node, rb);
	struct interval_tree_node *new =
		rb_entry(rb_new, struct interval_tree_node, rb);

	new->__subtree_last = old->__subtree_last;
  }

  static void augment_rotate(struct rb_node *rb_old, struct rb_node *rb_new)
  {
	struct interval_tree_node *old =
		rb_entry(rb_old, struct interval_tree_node, rb);
	struct interval_tree_node *new =
		rb_entry(rb_new, struct interval_tree_node, rb);

	new->__subtree_last = old->__subtree_last;
	old->__subtree_last = compute_subtree_last(old);
  }

  static const struct rb_augment_callbacks augment_callbacks = {
	augment_propagate, augment_copy, augment_rotate
  };

  void interval_tree_insert(struct interval_tree_node *node,
			    struct rb_root *root)
  {
	struct rb_node **link = &root->rb_node, *rb_parent = NULL;
	unsigned long start = node->start, last = node->last;
	struct interval_tree_node *parent;

	while (*link) {
		rb_parent = *link;
		parent = rb_entry(rb_parent, struct interval_tree_node, rb);
		if (parent->__subtree_last < last)
			parent->__subtree_last = last;
		if (start < parent->start)
			link = &parent->rb.rb_left;
		else
			link = &parent->rb.rb_right;
	}

	node->__subtree_last = last;
	rb_link_node(&node->rb, rb_parent, link);
	rb_insert_augmented(&node->rb, root, &augment_callbacks);
  }

  void interval_tree_remove(struct interval_tree_node *node,
			    struct rb_root *root)
  {
	rb_erase_augmented(&node->rb, root, &augment_callbacks);
  }
===================================
refcount_t API compared to atomic_t
===================================

.. contents:: :local:

Introduction
============

The goal of refcount_t API is to provide a minimal API for implementing
an object's reference counters. While a generic architecture-independent
implementation from lib/refcount.c uses atomic operations underneath,
there are a number of differences between some of the ``refcount_*()`` and
``atomic_*()`` functions with regards to the memory ordering guarantees.
This document outlines the differences and provides respective examples
in order to help maintainers validate their code against the change in
these memory ordering guarantees.

The terms used through this document try to follow the formal LKMM defined in
tools/memory-model/Documentation/explanation.txt.

memory-barriers.txt and atomic_t.txt provide more background to the
memory ordering in general and for atomic operations specifically.

Relevant types of memory ordering
=================================

.. note:: The following section only covers some of the memory
   ordering types that are relevant for the atomics and reference
   counters and used through this document. For a much broader picture
   please consult memory-barriers.txt document.

In the absence of any memory ordering guarantees (i.e. fully unordered)
atomics & refcounters only provide atomicity and
program order (po) relation (on the same CPU). It guarantees that
each ``atomic_*()`` and ``refcount_*()`` operation is atomic and instructions
are executed in program order on a single CPU.
This is implemented using READ_ONCE()/WRITE_ONCE() and
compare-and-swap primitives.

A strong (full) memory ordering guarantees that all prior loads and
stores (all po-earlier instructions) on the same CPU are completed
before any po-later instruction is executed on the same CPU.
It also guarantees that all po-earlier stores on the same CPU
and all propagated stores from other CPUs must propagate to all
other CPUs before any po-later instruction is executed on the original
CPU (A-cumulative property). This is implemented using smp_mb().

A RELEASE memory ordering guarantees that all prior loads and
stores (all po-earlier instructions) on the same CPU are completed
before the operation. It also guarantees that all po-earlier
stores on the same CPU and all propagated stores from other CPUs
must propagate to all other CPUs before the release operation
(A-cumulative property). This is implemented using
smp_store_release().

An ACQUIRE memory ordering guarantees that all post loads and
stores (all po-later instructions) on the same CPU are
completed after the acquire operation. It also guarantees that all
po-later stores on the same CPU must propagate to all other CPUs
after the acquire operation executes. This is implemented using
smp_acquire__after_ctrl_dep().

A control dependency (on success) for refcounters guarantees that
if a reference for an object was successfully obtained (reference
counter increment or addition happened, function returned true),
then further stores are ordered against this operation.
Control dependency on stores are not implemented using any explicit
barriers, but rely on CPU not to speculate on stores. This is only
a single CPU relation and provides no guarantees for other CPUs.


Comparison of functions
=======================

case 1) - non-"Read/Modify/Write" (RMW) ops
-------------------------------------------

Function changes:

 * atomic_set() --> refcount_set()
 * atomic_read() --> refcount_read()

Memory ordering guarantee changes:

 * none (both fully unordered)


case 2) - increment-based ops that return no value
--------------------------------------------------

Function changes:

 * atomic_inc() --> refcount_inc()
 * atomic_add() --> refcount_add()

Memory ordering guarantee changes:

 * none (both fully unordered)

case 3) - decrement-based RMW ops that return no value
------------------------------------------------------

Function changes:

 * atomic_dec() --> refcount_dec()

Memory ordering guarantee changes:

 * fully unordered --> RELEASE ordering


case 4) - increment-based RMW ops that return a value
-----------------------------------------------------

Function changes:

 * atomic_inc_not_zero() --> refcount_inc_not_zero()
 * no atomic counterpart --> refcount_add_not_zero()

Memory ordering guarantees changes:

 * fully ordered --> control dependency on success for stores

.. note:: We really assume here that necessary ordering is provided as a
   result of obtaining pointer to the object!


case 5) - generic dec/sub decrement-based RMW ops that return a value
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Function changes:

 * atomic_dec_and_test() --> refcount_dec_and_test()
 * atomic_sub_and_test() --> refcount_sub_and_test()

Memory ordering guarantees changes:

 * fully ordered --> RELEASE ordering + ACQUIRE ordering on success


case 6) other decrement-based RMW ops that return a value
---------------------------------------------------------

Function changes:

 * no atomic counterpart --> refcount_dec_if_one()
 * ``atomic_add_unless(&var, -1, 1)`` --> ``refcount_dec_not_one(&var)``

Memory ordering guarantees changes:

 * fully ordered --> RELEASE ordering + control dependency

.. note:: atomic_add_unless() only provides full order on success.


case 7) - lock-based RMW
------------------------

Function changes:

 * atomic_dec_and_lock() --> refcount_dec_and_lock()
 * atomic_dec_and_mutex_lock() --> refcount_dec_and_mutex_lock()

Memory ordering guarantees changes:

 * fully ordered --> RELEASE ordering + control dependency + hold
   spin_lock() on success
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===============
DMA and swiotlb
===============

swiotlb is a memory buffer allocator used by the Linux kernel DMA layer. It is
typically used when a device doing DMA can't directly access the target memory
buffer because of hardware limitations or other requirements. In such a case,
the DMA layer calls swiotlb to allocate a temporary memory buffer that conforms
to the limitations. The DMA is done to/from this temporary memory buffer, and
the CPU copies the data between the temporary buffer and the original target
memory buffer. This approach is generically called "bounce buffering", and the
temporary memory buffer is called a "bounce buffer".

Device drivers don't interact directly with swiotlb. Instead, drivers inform
the DMA layer of the DMA attributes of the devices they are managing, and use
the normal DMA map, unmap, and sync APIs when programming a device to do DMA.
These APIs use the device DMA attributes and kernel-wide settings to determine
if bounce buffering is necessary. If so, the DMA layer manages the allocation,
freeing, and sync'ing of bounce buffers. Since the DMA attributes are per
device, some devices in a system may use bounce buffering while others do not.

Because the CPU copies data between the bounce buffer and the original target
memory buffer, doing bounce buffering is slower than doing DMA directly to the
original memory buffer, and it consumes more CPU resources. So it is used only
when necessary for providing DMA functionality.

Usage Scenarios
---------------
swiotlb was originally created to handle DMA for devices with addressing
limitations. As physical memory sizes grew beyond 4 GiB, some devices could
only provide 32-bit DMA addresses. By allocating bounce buffer memory below
the 4 GiB line, these devices with addressing limitations could still work and
do DMA.

More recently, Confidential Computing (CoCo) VMs have the guest VM's memory
encrypted by default, and the memory is not accessible by the host hypervisor
and VMM. For the host to do I/O on behalf of the guest, the I/O must be
directed to guest memory that is unencrypted. CoCo VMs set a kernel-wide option
to force all DMA I/O to use bounce buffers, and the bounce buffer memory is set
up as unencrypted. The host does DMA I/O to/from the bounce buffer memory, and
the Linux kernel DMA layer does "sync" operations to cause the CPU to copy the
data to/from the original target memory buffer. The CPU copying bridges between
the unencrypted and the encrypted memory. This use of bounce buffers allows
device drivers to "just work" in a CoCo VM, with no modifications
needed to handle the memory encryption complexity.

Other edge case scenarios arise for bounce buffers. For example, when IOMMU
mappings are set up for a DMA operation to/from a device that is considered
"untrusted", the device should be given access only to the memory containing
the data being transferred. But if that memory occupies only part of an IOMMU
granule, other parts of the granule may contain unrelated kernel data. Since
IOMMU access control is per-granule, the untrusted device can gain access to
the unrelated kernel data. This problem is solved by bounce buffering the DMA
operation and ensuring that unused portions of the bounce buffers do not
contain any unrelated kernel data.

Core Functionality
------------------
The primary swiotlb APIs are swiotlb_tbl_map_single() and
swiotlb_tbl_unmap_single(). The "map" API allocates a bounce buffer of a
specified size in bytes and returns the physical address of the buffer. The
buffer memory is physically contiguous. The expectation is that the DMA layer
maps the physical memory address to a DMA address, and returns the DMA address
to the driver for programming into the device. If a DMA operation specifies
multiple memory buffer segments, a separate bounce buffer must be allocated for
each segment. swiotlb_tbl_map_single() always does a "sync" operation (i.e., a
CPU copy) to initialize the bounce buffer to match the contents of the original
buffer.

swiotlb_tbl_unmap_single() does the reverse. If the DMA operation might have
updated the bounce buffer memory and DMA_ATTR_SKIP_CPU_SYNC is not set, the
unmap does a "sync" operation to cause a CPU copy of the data from the bounce
buffer back to the original buffer. Then the bounce buffer memory is freed.

swiotlb also provides "sync" APIs that correspond to the dma_sync_*() APIs that
a driver may use when control of a buffer transitions between the CPU and the
device. The swiotlb "sync" APIs cause a CPU copy of the data between the
original buffer and the bounce buffer. Like the dma_sync_*() APIs, the swiotlb
"sync" APIs support doing a partial sync, where only a subset of the bounce
buffer is copied to/from the original buffer.

Core Functionality Constraints
------------------------------
The swiotlb map/unmap/sync APIs must operate without blocking, as they are
called by the corresponding DMA APIs which may run in contexts that cannot
block. Hence the default memory pool for swiotlb allocations must be
pre-allocated at boot time (but see Dynamic swiotlb below). Because swiotlb
allocations must be physically contiguous, the entire default memory pool is
allocated as a single contiguous block.

The need to pre-allocate the default swiotlb pool creates a boot-time tradeoff.
The pool should be large enough to ensure that bounce buffer requests can
always be satisfied, as the non-blocking requirement means requests can't wait
for space to become available. But a large pool potentially wastes memory, as
this pre-allocated memory is not available for other uses in the system. The
tradeoff is particularly acute in CoCo VMs that use bounce buffers for all DMA
I/O. These VMs use a heuristic to set the default pool size to ~6% of memory,
with a max of 1 GiB, which has the potential to be very wasteful of memory.
Conversely, the heuristic might produce a size that is insufficient, depending
on the I/O patterns of the workload in the VM. The dynamic swiotlb feature
described below can help, but has limitations. Better management of the swiotlb
default memory pool size remains an open issue.

A single allocation from swiotlb is limited to IO_TLB_SIZE * IO_TLB_SEGSIZE
bytes, which is 256 KiB with current definitions. When a device's DMA settings
are such that the device might use swiotlb, the maximum size of a DMA segment
must be limited to that 256 KiB. This value is communicated to higher-level
kernel code via dma_map_mapping_size() and swiotlb_max_mapping_size(). If the
higher-level code fails to account for this limit, it may make requests that
are too large for swiotlb, and get a "swiotlb full" error.

A key device DMA setting is "min_align_mask", which is a power of 2 minus 1
so that some number of low order bits are set, or it may be zero. swiotlb
allocations ensure these min_align_mask bits of the physical address of the
bounce buffer match the same bits in the address of the original buffer. When
min_align_mask is non-zero, it may produce an "alignment offset" in the address
of the bounce buffer that slightly reduces the maximum size of an allocation.
This potential alignment offset is reflected in the value returned by
swiotlb_max_mapping_size(), which can show up in places like
/sys/block/<device>/queue/max_sectors_kb. For example, if a device does not use
swiotlb, max_sectors_kb might be 512 KiB or larger. If a device might use
swiotlb, max_sectors_kb will be 256 KiB. When min_align_mask is non-zero,
max_sectors_kb might be even smaller, such as 252 KiB.

swiotlb_tbl_map_single() also takes an "alloc_align_mask" parameter. This
parameter specifies the allocation of bounce buffer space must start at a
physical address with the alloc_align_mask bits set to zero. But the actual
bounce buffer might start at a larger address if min_align_mask is non-zero.
Hence there may be pre-padding space that is allocated prior to the start of
the bounce buffer. Similarly, the end of the bounce buffer is rounded up to an
alloc_align_mask boundary, potentially resulting in post-padding space. Any
pre-padding or post-padding space is not initialized by swiotlb code. The
"alloc_align_mask" parameter is used by IOMMU code when mapping for untrusted
devices. It is set to the granule size - 1 so that the bounce buffer is
allocated entirely from granules that are not used for any other purpose.

Data structures concepts
------------------------
Memory used for swiotlb bounce buffers is allocated from overall system memory
as one or more "pools". The default pool is allocated during system boot with a
default size of 64 MiB. The default pool size may be modified with the
"swiotlb=" kernel boot line parameter. The default size may also be adjusted
due to other conditions, such as running in a CoCo VM, as described above. If
CONFIG_SWIOTLB_DYNAMIC is enabled, additional pools may be allocated later in
the life of the system. Each pool must be a contiguous range of physical
memory. The default pool is allocated below the 4 GiB physical address line so
it works for devices that can only address 32-bits of physical memory (unless
architecture-specific code provides the SWIOTLB_ANY flag). In a CoCo VM, the
pool memory must be decrypted before swiotlb is used.

Each pool is divided into "slots" of size IO_TLB_SIZE, which is 2 KiB with
current definitions. IO_TLB_SEGSIZE contiguous slots (128 slots) constitute
what might be called a "slot set". When a bounce buffer is allocated, it
occupies one or more contiguous slots. A slot is never shared by multiple
bounce buffers. Furthermore, a bounce buffer must be allocated from a single
slot set, which leads to the maximum bounce buffer size being IO_TLB_SIZE *
IO_TLB_SEGSIZE. Multiple smaller bounce buffers may co-exist in a single slot
set if the alignment and size constraints can be met.

Slots are also grouped into "areas", with the constraint that a slot set exists
entirely in a single area. Each area has its own spin lock that must be held to
manipulate the slots in that area. The division into areas avoids contending
for a single global spin lock when swiotlb is heavily used, such as in a CoCo
VM. The number of areas defaults to the number of CPUs in the system for
maximum parallelism, but since an area can't be smaller than IO_TLB_SEGSIZE
slots, it might be necessary to assign multiple CPUs to the same area. The
number of areas can also be set via the "swiotlb=" kernel boot parameter.

When allocating a bounce buffer, if the area associated with the calling CPU
does not have enough free space, areas associated with other CPUs are tried
sequentially. For each area tried, the area's spin lock must be obtained before
trying an allocation, so contention may occur if swiotlb is relatively busy
overall. But an allocation request does not fail unless all areas do not have
enough free space.

IO_TLB_SIZE, IO_TLB_SEGSIZE, and the number of areas must all be powers of 2 as
the code uses shifting and bit masking to do many of the calculations. The
number of areas is rounded up to a power of 2 if necessary to meet this
requirement.

The default pool is allocated with PAGE_SIZE alignment. If an alloc_align_mask
argument to swiotlb_tbl_map_single() specifies a larger alignment, one or more
initial slots in each slot set might not meet the alloc_align_mask criterium.
Because a bounce buffer allocation can't cross a slot set boundary, eliminating
those initial slots effectively reduces the max size of a bounce buffer.
Currently, there's no problem because alloc_align_mask is set based on IOMMU
granule size, and granules cannot be larger than PAGE_SIZE. But if that were to
change in the future, the initial pool allocation might need to be done with
alignment larger than PAGE_SIZE.

Dynamic swiotlb
---------------
When CONFIG_SWIOTLB_DYNAMIC is enabled, swiotlb can do on-demand expansion of
the amount of memory available for allocation as bounce buffers. If a bounce
buffer request fails due to lack of available space, an asynchronous background
task is kicked off to allocate memory from general system memory and turn it
into an swiotlb pool. Creating an additional pool must be done asynchronously
because the memory allocation may block, and as noted above, swiotlb requests
are not allowed to block. Once the background task is kicked off, the bounce
buffer request creates a "transient pool" to avoid returning an "swiotlb full"
error. A transient pool has the size of the bounce buffer request, and is
deleted when the bounce buffer is freed. Memory for this transient pool comes
from the general system memory atomic pool so that creation does not block.
Creating a transient pool has relatively high cost, particularly in a CoCo VM
where the memory must be decrypted, so it is done only as a stopgap until the
background task can add another non-transient pool.

Adding a dynamic pool has limitations. Like with the default pool, the memory
must be physically contiguous, so the size is limited to MAX_PAGE_ORDER pages
(e.g., 4 MiB on a typical x86 system). Due to memory fragmentation, a max size
allocation may not be available. The dynamic pool allocator tries smaller sizes
until it succeeds, but with a minimum size of 1 MiB. Given sufficient system
memory fragmentation, dynamically adding a pool might not succeed at all.

The number of areas in a dynamic pool may be different from the number of areas
in the default pool. Because the new pool size is typically a few MiB at most,
the number of areas will likely be smaller. For example, with a new pool size
of 4 MiB and the 256 KiB minimum area size, only 16 areas can be created. If
the system has more than 16 CPUs, multiple CPUs must share an area, creating
more lock contention.

New pools added via dynamic swiotlb are linked together in a linear list.
swiotlb code frequently must search for the pool containing a particular
swiotlb physical address, so that search is linear and not performant with a
large number of dynamic pools. The data structures could be improved for
faster searches.

Overall, dynamic swiotlb works best for small configurations with relatively
few CPUs. It allows the default swiotlb pool to be smaller so that memory is
not wasted, with dynamic pools making more space available if needed (as long
as fragmentation isn't an obstacle). It is less useful for large CoCo VMs.

Data Structure Details
----------------------
swiotlb is managed with four primary data structures: io_tlb_mem, io_tlb_pool,
io_tlb_area, and io_tlb_slot. io_tlb_mem describes a swiotlb memory allocator,
which includes the default memory pool and any dynamic or transient pools
linked to it. Limited statistics on swiotlb usage are kept per memory allocator
and are stored in this data structure. These statistics are available under
/sys/kernel/debug/swiotlb when CONFIG_DEBUG_FS is set.

io_tlb_pool describes a memory pool, either the default pool, a dynamic pool,
or a transient pool. The description includes the start and end addresses of
the memory in the pool, a pointer to an array of io_tlb_area structures, and a
pointer to an array of io_tlb_slot structures that are associated with the pool.

io_tlb_area describes an area. The primary field is the spin lock used to
serialize access to slots in the area. The io_tlb_area array for a pool has an
entry for each area, and is accessed using a 0-based area index derived from the
calling processor ID. Areas exist solely to allow parallel access to swiotlb
from multiple CPUs.

io_tlb_slot describes an individual memory slot in the pool, with size
IO_TLB_SIZE (2 KiB currently). The io_tlb_slot array is indexed by the slot
index computed from the bounce buffer address relative to the starting memory
address of the pool. The size of struct io_tlb_slot is 24 bytes, so the
overhead is about 1% of the slot size.

The io_tlb_slot array is designed to meet several requirements. First, the DMA
APIs and the corresponding swiotlb APIs use the bounce buffer address as the
identifier for a bounce buffer. This address is returned by
swiotlb_tbl_map_single(), and then passed as an argument to
swiotlb_tbl_unmap_single() and the swiotlb_sync_*() functions.  The original
memory buffer address obviously must be passed as an argument to
swiotlb_tbl_map_single(), but it is not passed to the other APIs. Consequently,
swiotlb data structures must save the original memory buffer address so that it
can be used when doing sync operations. This original address is saved in the
io_tlb_slot array.

Second, the io_tlb_slot array must handle partial sync requests. In such cases,
the argument to swiotlb_sync_*() is not the address of the start of the bounce
buffer but an address somewhere in the middle of the bounce buffer, and the
address of the start of the bounce buffer isn't known to swiotlb code. But
swiotlb code must be able to calculate the corresponding original memory buffer
address to do the CPU copy dictated by the "sync". So an adjusted original
memory buffer address is populated into the struct io_tlb_slot for each slot
occupied by the bounce buffer. An adjusted "alloc_size" of the bounce buffer is
also recorded in each struct io_tlb_slot so a sanity check can be performed on
the size of the "sync" operation. The "alloc_size" field is not used except for
the sanity check.

Third, the io_tlb_slot array is used to track available slots. The "list" field
in struct io_tlb_slot records how many contiguous available slots exist starting
at that slot. A "0" indicates that the slot is occupied. A value of "1"
indicates only the current slot is available. A value of "2" indicates the
current slot and the next slot are available, etc. The maximum value is
IO_TLB_SEGSIZE, which can appear in the first slot in a slot set, and indicates
that the entire slot set is available. These values are used when searching for
available slots to use for a new bounce buffer. They are updated when allocating
a new bounce buffer and when freeing a bounce buffer. At pool creation time, the
"list" field is initialized to IO_TLB_SEGSIZE down to 1 for the slots in every
slot set.

Fourth, the io_tlb_slot array keeps track of any "padding slots" allocated to
meet alloc_align_mask requirements described above. When
swiotlb_tlb_map_single() allocates bounce buffer space to meet alloc_align_mask
requirements, it may allocate pre-padding space across zero or more slots. But
when swiotbl_tlb_unmap_single() is called with the bounce buffer address, the
alloc_align_mask value that governed the allocation, and therefore the
allocation of any padding slots, is not known. The "pad_slots" field records
the number of padding slots so that swiotlb_tbl_unmap_single() can free them.
The "pad_slots" value is recorded only in the first non-padding slot allocated
to the bounce buffer.

Restricted pools
----------------
The swiotlb machinery is also used for "restricted pools", which are pools of
memory separate from the default swiotlb pool, and that are dedicated for DMA
use by a particular device. Restricted pools provide a level of DMA memory
protection on systems with limited hardware protection capabilities, such as
those lacking an IOMMU. Such usage is specified by DeviceTree entries and
requires that CONFIG_DMA_RESTRICTED_POOL is set. Each restricted pool is based
on its own io_tlb_mem data structure that is independent of the main swiotlb
io_tlb_mem.

Restricted pools add swiotlb_alloc() and swiotlb_free() APIs, which are called
from the dma_alloc_*() and dma_free_*() APIs. The swiotlb_alloc/free() APIs
allocate/free slots from/to the restricted pool directly and do not go through
swiotlb_tbl_map/unmap_single().
=================
Symbol Namespaces
=================

The following document describes how to use Symbol Namespaces to structure the
export surface of in-kernel symbols exported through the family of
EXPORT_SYMBOL() macros.

.. Table of Contents

	=== 1 Introduction
	=== 2 How to define Symbol Namespaces
	   --- 2.1 Using the EXPORT_SYMBOL macros
	   --- 2.2 Using the DEFAULT_SYMBOL_NAMESPACE define
	=== 3 How to use Symbols exported in Namespaces
	=== 4 Loading Modules that use namespaced Symbols
	=== 5 Automatically creating MODULE_IMPORT_NS statements

1. Introduction
===============

Symbol Namespaces have been introduced as a means to structure the export
surface of the in-kernel API. It allows subsystem maintainers to partition
their exported symbols into separate namespaces. That is useful for
documentation purposes (think of the SUBSYSTEM_DEBUG namespace) as well as for
limiting the availability of a set of symbols for use in other parts of the
kernel. As of today, modules that make use of symbols exported into namespaces,
are required to import the namespace. Otherwise the kernel will, depending on
its configuration, reject loading the module or warn about a missing import.

Additionally, it is possible to put symbols into a module namespace, strictly
limiting which modules are allowed to use these symbols.

2. How to define Symbol Namespaces
==================================

Symbols can be exported into namespace using different methods. All of them are
changing the way EXPORT_SYMBOL and friends are instrumented to create ksymtab
entries.

2.1 Using the EXPORT_SYMBOL macros
==================================

In addition to the macros EXPORT_SYMBOL() and EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL(), that allow
exporting of kernel symbols to the kernel symbol table, variants of these are
available to export symbols into a certain namespace: EXPORT_SYMBOL_NS() and
EXPORT_SYMBOL_NS_GPL(). They take one additional argument: the namespace.
Please note that due to macro expansion that argument needs to be a
preprocessor symbol. E.g. to export the symbol ``usb_stor_suspend`` into the
namespace ``USB_STORAGE``, use::

	EXPORT_SYMBOL_NS(usb_stor_suspend, USB_STORAGE);

The corresponding ksymtab entry struct ``kernel_symbol`` will have the member
``namespace`` set accordingly. A symbol that is exported without a namespace will
refer to ``NULL``. There is no default namespace if none is defined. ``modpost``
and kernel/module/main.c make use the namespace at build time or module load
time, respectively.

2.2 Using the DEFAULT_SYMBOL_NAMESPACE define
=============================================

Defining namespaces for all symbols of a subsystem can be very verbose and may
become hard to maintain. Therefore a default define (DEFAULT_SYMBOL_NAMESPACE)
is been provided, that, if set, will become the default for all EXPORT_SYMBOL()
and EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL() macro expansions that do not specify a namespace.

There are multiple ways of specifying this define and it depends on the
subsystem and the maintainer's preference, which one to use. The first option
is to define the default namespace in the ``Makefile`` of the subsystem. E.g. to
export all symbols defined in usb-common into the namespace USB_COMMON, add a
line like this to drivers/usb/common/Makefile::

	ccflags-y += -DDEFAULT_SYMBOL_NAMESPACE='"USB_COMMON"'

That will affect all EXPORT_SYMBOL() and EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL() statements. A
symbol exported with EXPORT_SYMBOL_NS() while this definition is present, will
still be exported into the namespace that is passed as the namespace argument
as this argument has preference over a default symbol namespace.

A second option to define the default namespace is directly in the compilation
unit as preprocessor statement. The above example would then read::

	#undef  DEFAULT_SYMBOL_NAMESPACE
	#define DEFAULT_SYMBOL_NAMESPACE "USB_COMMON"

within the corresponding compilation unit before any EXPORT_SYMBOL macro is
used.

2.3 Using the EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL_FOR_MODULES() macro
===================================================

Symbols exported using this macro are put into a module namespace. This
namespace cannot be imported.

The macro takes a comma separated list of module names, allowing only those
modules to access this symbol. Simple tail-globs are supported.

For example:

  EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL_FOR_MODULES(preempt_notifier_inc, "kvm,kvm-*")

will limit usage of this symbol to modules whoes name matches the given
patterns.

3. How to use Symbols exported in Namespaces
============================================

In order to use symbols that are exported into namespaces, kernel modules need
to explicitly import these namespaces. Otherwise the kernel might reject to
load the module. The module code is required to use the macro MODULE_IMPORT_NS
for the namespaces it uses symbols from. E.g. a module using the
usb_stor_suspend symbol from above, needs to import the namespace USB_STORAGE
using a statement like::

	MODULE_IMPORT_NS(USB_STORAGE);

This will create a ``modinfo`` tag in the module for each imported namespace.
This has the side effect, that the imported namespaces of a module can be
inspected with modinfo::

	$ modinfo drivers/usb/storage/ums-karma.ko
	[...]
	import_ns:      USB_STORAGE
	[...]


It is advisable to add the MODULE_IMPORT_NS() statement close to other module
metadata definitions like MODULE_AUTHOR() or MODULE_LICENSE(). Refer to section
5. for a way to create missing import statements automatically.

4. Loading Modules that use namespaced Symbols
==============================================

At module loading time (e.g. ``insmod``), the kernel will check each symbol
referenced from the module for its availability and whether the namespace it
might be exported to has been imported by the module. The default behaviour of
the kernel is to reject loading modules that don't specify sufficient imports.
An error will be logged and loading will be failed with EINVAL. In order to
allow loading of modules that don't satisfy this precondition, a configuration
option is available: Setting MODULE_ALLOW_MISSING_NAMESPACE_IMPORTS=y will
enable loading regardless, but will emit a warning.

5. Automatically creating MODULE_IMPORT_NS statements
=====================================================

Missing namespaces imports can easily be detected at build time. In fact,
modpost will emit a warning if a module uses a symbol from a namespace
without importing it.
MODULE_IMPORT_NS() statements will usually be added at a definite location
(along with other module meta data). To make the life of module authors (and
subsystem maintainers) easier, a script and make target is available to fixup
missing imports. Fixing missing imports can be done with::

	$ make nsdeps

A typical scenario for module authors would be::

	- write code that depends on a symbol from a not imported namespace
	- ``make``
	- notice the warning of modpost telling about a missing import
	- run ``make nsdeps`` to add the import to the correct code location

For subsystem maintainers introducing a namespace, the steps are very similar.
Again, ``make nsdeps`` will eventually add the missing namespace imports for
in-tree modules::

	- move or add symbols to a namespace (e.g. with EXPORT_SYMBOL_NS())
	- ``make`` (preferably with an allmodconfig to cover all in-kernel
	  modules)
	- notice the warning of modpost telling about a missing import
	- run ``make nsdeps`` to add the import to the correct code location

You can also run nsdeps for external module builds. A typical usage is::

	$ make -C <path_to_kernel_src> M=$PWD nsdeps

Note: it will happily generate an import statement for the module namespace;
which will not work and generates build and runtime failures.
===================
this_cpu operations
===================

:Author: Christoph Lameter, August 4th, 2014
:Author: Pranith Kumar, Aug 2nd, 2014

this_cpu operations are a way of optimizing access to per cpu
variables associated with the *currently* executing processor. This is
done through the use of segment registers (or a dedicated register where
the cpu permanently stored the beginning of the per cpu	area for a
specific processor).

this_cpu operations add a per cpu variable offset to the processor
specific per cpu base and encode that operation in the instruction
operating on the per cpu variable.

This means that there are no atomicity issues between the calculation of
the offset and the operation on the data. Therefore it is not
necessary to disable preemption or interrupts to ensure that the
processor is not changed between the calculation of the address and
the operation on the data.

Read-modify-write operations are of particular interest. Frequently
processors have special lower latency instructions that can operate
without the typical synchronization overhead, but still provide some
sort of relaxed atomicity guarantees. The x86, for example, can execute
RMW (Read Modify Write) instructions like inc/dec/cmpxchg without the
lock prefix and the associated latency penalty.

Access to the variable without the lock prefix is not synchronized but
synchronization is not necessary since we are dealing with per cpu
data specific to the currently executing processor. Only the current
processor should be accessing that variable and therefore there are no
concurrency issues with other processors in the system.

Please note that accesses by remote processors to a per cpu area are
exceptional situations and may impact performance and/or correctness
(remote write operations) of local RMW operations via this_cpu_*.

The main use of the this_cpu operations has been to optimize counter
operations.

The following this_cpu() operations with implied preemption protection
are defined. These operations can be used without worrying about
preemption and interrupts::

	this_cpu_read(pcp)
	this_cpu_write(pcp, val)
	this_cpu_add(pcp, val)
	this_cpu_and(pcp, val)
	this_cpu_or(pcp, val)
	this_cpu_add_return(pcp, val)
	this_cpu_xchg(pcp, nval)
	this_cpu_cmpxchg(pcp, oval, nval)
	this_cpu_sub(pcp, val)
	this_cpu_inc(pcp)
	this_cpu_dec(pcp)
	this_cpu_sub_return(pcp, val)
	this_cpu_inc_return(pcp)
	this_cpu_dec_return(pcp)


Inner working of this_cpu operations
------------------------------------

On x86 the fs: or the gs: segment registers contain the base of the
per cpu area. It is then possible to simply use the segment override
to relocate a per cpu relative address to the proper per cpu area for
the processor. So the relocation to the per cpu base is encoded in the
instruction via a segment register prefix.

For example::

	DEFINE_PER_CPU(int, x);
	int z;

	z = this_cpu_read(x);

results in a single instruction::

	mov ax, gs:[x]

instead of a sequence of calculation of the address and then a fetch
from that address which occurs with the per cpu operations. Before
this_cpu_ops such sequence also required preempt disable/enable to
prevent the kernel from moving the thread to a different processor
while the calculation is performed.

Consider the following this_cpu operation::

	this_cpu_inc(x)

The above results in the following single instruction (no lock prefix!)::

	inc gs:[x]

instead of the following operations required if there is no segment
register::

	int *y;
	int cpu;

	cpu = get_cpu();
	y = per_cpu_ptr(&x, cpu);
	(*y)++;
	put_cpu();

Note that these operations can only be used on per cpu data that is
reserved for a specific processor. Without disabling preemption in the
surrounding code this_cpu_inc() will only guarantee that one of the
per cpu counters is correctly incremented. However, there is no
guarantee that the OS will not move the process directly before or
after the this_cpu instruction is executed. In general this means that
the value of the individual counters for each processor are
meaningless. The sum of all the per cpu counters is the only value
that is of interest.

Per cpu variables are used for performance reasons. Bouncing cache
lines can be avoided if multiple processors concurrently go through
the same code paths.  Since each processor has its own per cpu
variables no concurrent cache line updates take place. The price that
has to be paid for this optimization is the need to add up the per cpu
counters when the value of a counter is needed.


Special operations
------------------

::

	y = this_cpu_ptr(&x)

Takes the offset of a per cpu variable (&x !) and returns the address
of the per cpu variable that belongs to the currently executing
processor.  this_cpu_ptr avoids multiple steps that the common
get_cpu/put_cpu sequence requires. No processor number is
available. Instead, the offset of the local per cpu area is simply
added to the per cpu offset.

Note that this operation is usually used in a code segment when
preemption has been disabled. The pointer is then used to
access local per cpu data in a critical section. When preemption
is re-enabled this pointer is usually no longer useful since it may
no longer point to per cpu data of the current processor.


Per cpu variables and offsets
-----------------------------

Per cpu variables have *offsets* to the beginning of the per cpu
area. They do not have addresses although they look like that in the
code. Offsets cannot be directly dereferenced. The offset must be
added to a base pointer of a per cpu area of a processor in order to
form a valid address.

Therefore the use of x or &x outside of the context of per cpu
operations is invalid and will generally be treated like a NULL
pointer dereference.

::

	DEFINE_PER_CPU(int, x);

In the context of per cpu operations the above implies that x is a per
cpu variable. Most this_cpu operations take a cpu variable.

::

	int __percpu *p = &x;

&x and hence p is the *offset* of a per cpu variable. this_cpu_ptr()
takes the offset of a per cpu variable which makes this look a bit
strange.


Operations on a field of a per cpu structure
--------------------------------------------

Let's say we have a percpu structure::

	struct s {
		int n,m;
	};

	DEFINE_PER_CPU(struct s, p);


Operations on these fields are straightforward::

	this_cpu_inc(p.m)

	z = this_cpu_cmpxchg(p.m, 0, 1);


If we have an offset to struct s::

	struct s __percpu *ps = &p;

	this_cpu_dec(ps->m);

	z = this_cpu_inc_return(ps->n);


The calculation of the pointer may require the use of this_cpu_ptr()
if we do not make use of this_cpu ops later to manipulate fields::

	struct s *pp;

	pp = this_cpu_ptr(&p);

	pp->m--;

	z = pp->n++;


Variants of this_cpu ops
------------------------

this_cpu ops are interrupt safe. Some architectures do not support
these per cpu local operations. In that case the operation must be
replaced by code that disables interrupts, then does the operations
that are guaranteed to be atomic and then re-enable interrupts. Doing
so is expensive. If there are other reasons why the scheduler cannot
change the processor we are executing on then there is no reason to
disable interrupts. For that purpose the following __this_cpu operations
are provided.

These operations have no guarantee against concurrent interrupts or
preemption. If a per cpu variable is not used in an interrupt context
and the scheduler cannot preempt, then they are safe. If any interrupts
still occur while an operation is in progress and if the interrupt too
modifies the variable, then RMW actions can not be guaranteed to be
safe::

	__this_cpu_read(pcp)
	__this_cpu_write(pcp, val)
	__this_cpu_add(pcp, val)
	__this_cpu_and(pcp, val)
	__this_cpu_or(pcp, val)
	__this_cpu_add_return(pcp, val)
	__this_cpu_xchg(pcp, nval)
	__this_cpu_cmpxchg(pcp, oval, nval)
	__this_cpu_sub(pcp, val)
	__this_cpu_inc(pcp)
	__this_cpu_dec(pcp)
	__this_cpu_sub_return(pcp, val)
	__this_cpu_inc_return(pcp)
	__this_cpu_dec_return(pcp)


Will increment x and will not fall-back to code that disables
interrupts on platforms that cannot accomplish atomicity through
address relocation and a Read-Modify-Write operation in the same
instruction.


&this_cpu_ptr(pp)->n vs this_cpu_ptr(&pp->n)
--------------------------------------------

The first operation takes the offset and forms an address and then
adds the offset of the n field. This may result in two add
instructions emitted by the compiler.

The second one first adds the two offsets and then does the
relocation.  IMHO the second form looks cleaner and has an easier time
with (). The second form also is consistent with the way
this_cpu_read() and friends are used.


Remote access to per cpu data
------------------------------

Per cpu data structures are designed to be used by one cpu exclusively.
If you use the variables as intended, this_cpu_ops() are guaranteed to
be "atomic" as no other CPU has access to these data structures.

There are special cases where you might need to access per cpu data
structures remotely. It is usually safe to do a remote read access
and that is frequently done to summarize counters. Remote write access
something which could be problematic because this_cpu ops do not
have lock semantics. A remote write may interfere with a this_cpu
RMW operation.

Remote write accesses to percpu data structures are highly discouraged
unless absolutely necessary. Please consider using an IPI to wake up
the remote CPU and perform the update to its per cpu area.

To access per-cpu data structure remotely, typically the per_cpu_ptr()
function is used::


	DEFINE_PER_CPU(struct data, datap);

	struct data *p = per_cpu_ptr(&datap, cpu);

This makes it explicit that we are getting ready to access a percpu
area remotely.

You can also do the following to convert the datap offset to an address::

	struct data *p = this_cpu_ptr(&datap);

but, passing of pointers calculated via this_cpu_ptr to other cpus is
unusual and should be avoided.

Remote access are typically only for reading the status of another cpus
per cpu data. Write accesses can cause unique problems due to the
relaxed synchronization requirements for this_cpu operations.

One example that illustrates some concerns with write operations is
the following scenario that occurs because two per cpu variables
share a cache-line but the relaxed synchronization is applied to
only one process updating the cache-line.

Consider the following example::


	struct test {
		atomic_t a;
		int b;
	};

	DEFINE_PER_CPU(struct test, onecacheline);

There is some concern about what would happen if the field 'a' is updated
remotely from one processor and the local processor would use this_cpu ops
to update field b. Care should be taken that such simultaneous accesses to
data within the same cache line are avoided. Also costly synchronization
may be necessary. IPIs are generally recommended in such scenarios instead
of a remote write to the per cpu area of another processor.

Even in cases where the remote writes are rare, please bear in
mind that a remote write will evict the cache line from the processor
that most likely will access it. If the processor wakes up and finds a
missing local cache line of a per cpu area, its performance and hence
the wake up times will be affected.
ktime accessors
===============

Device drivers can read the current time using ktime_get() and the many
related functions declared in linux/timekeeping.h. As a rule of thumb,
using an accessor with a shorter name is preferred over one with a longer
name if both are equally fit for a particular use case.

Basic ktime_t based interfaces
------------------------------

The recommended simplest form returns an opaque ktime_t, with variants
that return time for different clock references:


.. c:function:: ktime_t ktime_get( void )

	CLOCK_MONOTONIC

	Useful for reliable timestamps and measuring short time intervals
	accurately. Starts at system boot time but stops during suspend.

.. c:function:: ktime_t ktime_get_boottime( void )

	CLOCK_BOOTTIME

	Like ktime_get(), but does not stop when suspended. This can be
	used e.g. for key expiration times that need to be synchronized
	with other machines across a suspend operation.

.. c:function:: ktime_t ktime_get_real( void )

	CLOCK_REALTIME

	Returns the time in relative to the UNIX epoch starting in 1970
	using the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), same as gettimeofday()
	user space. This is used for all timestamps that need to
	persist across a reboot, like inode times, but should be avoided
	for internal uses, since it can jump backwards due to a leap
	second update, NTP adjustment settimeofday() operation from user
	space.

.. c:function:: ktime_t ktime_get_clocktai( void )

	 CLOCK_TAI

	Like ktime_get_real(), but uses the International Atomic Time (TAI)
	reference instead of UTC to avoid jumping on leap second updates.
	This is rarely useful in the kernel.

.. c:function:: ktime_t ktime_get_raw( void )

	CLOCK_MONOTONIC_RAW

	Like ktime_get(), but runs at the same rate as the hardware
	clocksource without (NTP) adjustments for clock drift. This is
	also rarely needed in the kernel.

nanosecond, timespec64, and second output
-----------------------------------------

For all of the above, there are variants that return the time in a
different format depending on what is required by the user:

.. c:function:: u64 ktime_get_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_boottime_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_real_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_clocktai_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_raw_ns( void )

	Same as the plain ktime_get functions, but returning a u64 number
	of nanoseconds in the respective time reference, which may be
	more convenient for some callers.

.. c:function:: void ktime_get_ts64( struct timespec64 * )
		void ktime_get_boottime_ts64( struct timespec64 * )
		void ktime_get_real_ts64( struct timespec64 * )
		void ktime_get_clocktai_ts64( struct timespec64 * )
		void ktime_get_raw_ts64( struct timespec64 * )

	Same above, but returns the time in a 'struct timespec64', split
	into seconds and nanoseconds. This can avoid an extra division
	when printing the time, or when passing it into an external
	interface that expects a 'timespec' or 'timeval' structure.

.. c:function:: time64_t ktime_get_seconds( void )
		time64_t ktime_get_boottime_seconds( void )
		time64_t ktime_get_real_seconds( void )
		time64_t ktime_get_clocktai_seconds( void )
		time64_t ktime_get_raw_seconds( void )

	Return a coarse-grained version of the time as a scalar
	time64_t. This avoids accessing the clock hardware and rounds
	down the seconds to the full seconds of the last timer tick
	using the respective reference.

Coarse and fast_ns access
-------------------------

Some additional variants exist for more specialized cases:

.. c:function:: ktime_t ktime_get_coarse( void )
		ktime_t ktime_get_coarse_boottime( void )
		ktime_t ktime_get_coarse_real( void )
		ktime_t ktime_get_coarse_clocktai( void )

.. c:function:: u64 ktime_get_coarse_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_coarse_boottime_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_coarse_real_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_coarse_clocktai_ns( void )

.. c:function:: void ktime_get_coarse_ts64( struct timespec64 * )
		void ktime_get_coarse_boottime_ts64( struct timespec64 * )
		void ktime_get_coarse_real_ts64( struct timespec64 * )
		void ktime_get_coarse_clocktai_ts64( struct timespec64 * )

	These are quicker than the non-coarse versions, but less accurate,
	corresponding to CLOCK_MONOTONIC_COARSE and CLOCK_REALTIME_COARSE
	in user space, along with the equivalent boottime/tai/raw
	timebase not available in user space.

	The time returned here corresponds to the last timer tick, which
	may be as much as 10ms in the past (for CONFIG_HZ=100), same as
	reading the 'jiffies' variable.  These are only useful when called
	in a fast path and one still expects better than second accuracy,
	but can't easily use 'jiffies', e.g. for inode timestamps.
	Skipping the hardware clock access saves around 100 CPU cycles
	on most modern machines with a reliable cycle counter, but
	up to several microseconds on older hardware with an external
	clocksource.

.. c:function:: u64 ktime_get_mono_fast_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_raw_fast_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_boot_fast_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_tai_fast_ns( void )
		u64 ktime_get_real_fast_ns( void )

	These variants are safe to call from any context, including from
	a non-maskable interrupt (NMI) during a timekeeper update, and
	while we are entering suspend with the clocksource powered down.
	This is useful in some tracing or debugging code as well as
	machine check reporting, but most drivers should never call them,
	since the time is allowed to jump under certain conditions.

Deprecated time interfaces
--------------------------

Older kernels used some other interfaces that are now being phased out
but may appear in third-party drivers being ported here. In particular,
all interfaces returning a 'struct timeval' or 'struct timespec' have
been replaced because the tv_sec member overflows in year 2038 on 32-bit
architectures. These are the recommended replacements:

.. c:function:: void ktime_get_ts( struct timespec * )

	Use ktime_get() or ktime_get_ts64() instead.

.. c:function:: void do_gettimeofday( struct timeval * )
		void getnstimeofday( struct timespec * )
		void getnstimeofday64( struct timespec64 * )
		void ktime_get_real_ts( struct timespec * )

	ktime_get_real_ts64() is a direct replacement, but consider using
	monotonic time (ktime_get_ts64()) and/or a ktime_t based interface
	(ktime_get()/ktime_get_real()).

.. c:function:: struct timespec current_kernel_time( void )
		struct timespec64 current_kernel_time64( void )
		struct timespec get_monotonic_coarse( void )
		struct timespec64 get_monotonic_coarse64( void )

	These are replaced by ktime_get_coarse_real_ts64() and
	ktime_get_coarse_ts64(). However, A lot of code that wants
	coarse-grained times can use the simple 'jiffies' instead, while
	some drivers may actually want the higher resolution accessors
	these days.

.. c:function:: struct timespec getrawmonotonic( void )
		struct timespec64 getrawmonotonic64( void )
		struct timespec timekeeping_clocktai( void )
		struct timespec64 timekeeping_clocktai64( void )
		struct timespec get_monotonic_boottime( void )
		struct timespec64 get_monotonic_boottime64( void )

	These are replaced by ktime_get_raw()/ktime_get_raw_ts64(),
	ktime_get_clocktai()/ktime_get_clocktai_ts64() as well
	as ktime_get_boottime()/ktime_get_boottime_ts64().
	However, if the particular choice of clock source is not
	important for the user, consider converting to
	ktime_get()/ktime_get_ts64() instead for consistency.
===============================
The Linux Kernel Tracepoint API
===============================

:Author: Jason Baron
:Author: William Cohen

Introduction
============

Tracepoints are static probe points that are located in strategic points
throughout the kernel. 'Probes' register/unregister with tracepoints via
a callback mechanism. The 'probes' are strictly typed functions that are
passed a unique set of parameters defined by each tracepoint.

From this simple callback mechanism, 'probes' can be used to profile,
debug, and understand kernel behavior. There are a number of tools that
provide a framework for using 'probes'. These tools include Systemtap,
ftrace, and LTTng.

Tracepoints are defined in a number of header files via various macros.
Thus, the purpose of this document is to provide a clear accounting of
the available tracepoints. The intention is to understand not only what
tracepoints are available but also to understand where future
tracepoints might be added.

The API presented has functions of the form:
``trace_tracepointname(function parameters)``. These are the tracepoints
callbacks that are found throughout the code. Registering and
unregistering probes with these callback sites is covered in the
``Documentation/trace/*`` directory.

IRQ
===

.. kernel-doc:: include/trace/events/irq.h
   :internal:

SIGNAL
======

.. kernel-doc:: include/trace/events/signal.h
   :internal:

Block IO
========

.. kernel-doc:: include/trace/events/block.h
   :internal:

Workqueue
=========

.. kernel-doc:: include/trace/events/workqueue.h
   :internal:
=========================
Unaligned Memory Accesses
=========================

:Author: Daniel Drake <dsd@gentoo.org>,
:Author: Johannes Berg <johannes@sipsolutions.net>

:With help from: Alan Cox, Avuton Olrich, Heikki Orsila, Jan Engelhardt,
  Kyle McMartin, Kyle Moffett, Randy Dunlap, Robert Hancock, Uli Kunitz,
  Vadim Lobanov


Linux runs on a wide variety of architectures which have varying behaviour
when it comes to memory access. This document presents some details about
unaligned accesses, why you need to write code that doesn't cause them,
and how to write such code!


The definition of an unaligned access
=====================================

Unaligned memory accesses occur when you try to read N bytes of data starting
from an address that is not evenly divisible by N (i.e. addr % N != 0).
For example, reading 4 bytes of data from address 0x10004 is fine, but
reading 4 bytes of data from address 0x10005 would be an unaligned memory
access.

The above may seem a little vague, as memory access can happen in different
ways. The context here is at the machine code level: certain instructions read
or write a number of bytes to or from memory (e.g. movb, movw, movl in x86
assembly). As will become clear, it is relatively easy to spot C statements
which will compile to multiple-byte memory access instructions, namely when
dealing with types such as u16, u32 and u64.


Natural alignment
=================

The rule mentioned above forms what we refer to as natural alignment:
When accessing N bytes of memory, the base memory address must be evenly
divisible by N, i.e. addr % N == 0.

When writing code, assume the target architecture has natural alignment
requirements.

In reality, only a few architectures require natural alignment on all sizes
of memory access. However, we must consider ALL supported architectures;
writing code that satisfies natural alignment requirements is the easiest way
to achieve full portability.


Why unaligned access is bad
===========================

The effects of performing an unaligned memory access vary from architecture
to architecture. It would be easy to write a whole document on the differences
here; a summary of the common scenarios is presented below:

 - Some architectures are able to perform unaligned memory accesses
   transparently, but there is usually a significant performance cost.
 - Some architectures raise processor exceptions when unaligned accesses
   happen. The exception handler is able to correct the unaligned access,
   at significant cost to performance.
 - Some architectures raise processor exceptions when unaligned accesses
   happen, but the exceptions do not contain enough information for the
   unaligned access to be corrected.
 - Some architectures are not capable of unaligned memory access, but will
   silently perform a different memory access to the one that was requested,
   resulting in a subtle code bug that is hard to detect!

It should be obvious from the above that if your code causes unaligned
memory accesses to happen, your code will not work correctly on certain
platforms and will cause performance problems on others.


Code that does not cause unaligned access
=========================================

At first, the concepts above may seem a little hard to relate to actual
coding practice. After all, you don't have a great deal of control over
memory addresses of certain variables, etc.

Fortunately things are not too complex, as in most cases, the compiler
ensures that things will work for you. For example, take the following
structure::

	struct foo {
		u16 field1;
		u32 field2;
		u8 field3;
	};

Let us assume that an instance of the above structure resides in memory
starting at address 0x10000. With a basic level of understanding, it would
not be unreasonable to expect that accessing field2 would cause an unaligned
access. You'd be expecting field2 to be located at offset 2 bytes into the
structure, i.e. address 0x10002, but that address is not evenly divisible
by 4 (remember, we're reading a 4 byte value here).

Fortunately, the compiler understands the alignment constraints, so in the
above case it would insert 2 bytes of padding in between field1 and field2.
Therefore, for standard structure types you can always rely on the compiler
to pad structures so that accesses to fields are suitably aligned (assuming
you do not cast the field to a type of different length).

Similarly, you can also rely on the compiler to align variables and function
parameters to a naturally aligned scheme, based on the size of the type of
the variable.

At this point, it should be clear that accessing a single byte (u8 or char)
will never cause an unaligned access, because all memory addresses are evenly
divisible by one.

On a related topic, with the above considerations in mind you may observe
that you could reorder the fields in the structure in order to place fields
where padding would otherwise be inserted, and hence reduce the overall
resident memory size of structure instances. The optimal layout of the
above example is::

	struct foo {
		u32 field2;
		u16 field1;
		u8 field3;
	};

For a natural alignment scheme, the compiler would only have to add a single
byte of padding at the end of the structure. This padding is added in order
to satisfy alignment constraints for arrays of these structures.

Another point worth mentioning is the use of __attribute__((packed)) on a
structure type. This GCC-specific attribute tells the compiler never to
insert any padding within structures, useful when you want to use a C struct
to represent some data that comes in a fixed arrangement 'off the wire'.

You might be inclined to believe that usage of this attribute can easily
lead to unaligned accesses when accessing fields that do not satisfy
architectural alignment requirements. However, again, the compiler is aware
of the alignment constraints and will generate extra instructions to perform
the memory access in a way that does not cause unaligned access. Of course,
the extra instructions obviously cause a loss in performance compared to the
non-packed case, so the packed attribute should only be used when avoiding
structure padding is of importance.


Code that causes unaligned access
=================================

With the above in mind, let's move onto a real life example of a function
that can cause an unaligned memory access. The following function taken
from include/linux/etherdevice.h is an optimized routine to compare two
ethernet MAC addresses for equality::

  bool ether_addr_equal(const u8 *addr1, const u8 *addr2)
  {
  #ifdef CONFIG_HAVE_EFFICIENT_UNALIGNED_ACCESS
	u32 fold = ((*(const u32 *)addr1) ^ (*(const u32 *)addr2)) |
		   ((*(const u16 *)(addr1 + 4)) ^ (*(const u16 *)(addr2 + 4)));

	return fold == 0;
  #else
	const u16 *a = (const u16 *)addr1;
	const u16 *b = (const u16 *)addr2;
	return ((a[0] ^ b[0]) | (a[1] ^ b[1]) | (a[2] ^ b[2])) == 0;
  #endif
  }

In the above function, when the hardware has efficient unaligned access
capability, there is no issue with this code.  But when the hardware isn't
able to access memory on arbitrary boundaries, the reference to a[0] causes
2 bytes (16 bits) to be read from memory starting at address addr1.

Think about what would happen if addr1 was an odd address such as 0x10003.
(Hint: it'd be an unaligned access.)

Despite the potential unaligned access problems with the above function, it
is included in the kernel anyway but is understood to only work normally on
16-bit-aligned addresses. It is up to the caller to ensure this alignment or
not use this function at all. This alignment-unsafe function is still useful
as it is a decent optimization for the cases when you can ensure alignment,
which is true almost all of the time in ethernet networking context.


Here is another example of some code that could cause unaligned accesses::

	void myfunc(u8 *data, u32 value)
	{
		[...]
		*((u32 *) data) = cpu_to_le32(value);
		[...]
	}

This code will cause unaligned accesses every time the data parameter points
to an address that is not evenly divisible by 4.

In summary, the 2 main scenarios where you may run into unaligned access
problems involve:

 1. Casting variables to types of different lengths
 2. Pointer arithmetic followed by access to at least 2 bytes of data


Avoiding unaligned accesses
===========================

The easiest way to avoid unaligned access is to use the get_unaligned() and
put_unaligned() macros provided by the <linux/unaligned.h> header file.

Going back to an earlier example of code that potentially causes unaligned
access::

	void myfunc(u8 *data, u32 value)
	{
		[...]
		*((u32 *) data) = cpu_to_le32(value);
		[...]
	}

To avoid the unaligned memory access, you would rewrite it as follows::

	void myfunc(u8 *data, u32 value)
	{
		[...]
		value = cpu_to_le32(value);
		put_unaligned(value, (u32 *) data);
		[...]
	}

The get_unaligned() macro works similarly. Assuming 'data' is a pointer to
memory and you wish to avoid unaligned access, its usage is as follows::

	u32 value = get_unaligned((u32 *) data);

These macros work for memory accesses of any length (not just 32 bits as
in the examples above). Be aware that when compared to standard access of
aligned memory, using these macros to access unaligned memory can be costly in
terms of performance.

If use of such macros is not convenient, another option is to use memcpy(),
where the source or destination (or both) are of type u8* or unsigned char*.
Due to the byte-wise nature of this operation, unaligned accesses are avoided.


Alignment vs. Networking
========================

On architectures that require aligned loads, networking requires that the IP
header is aligned on a four-byte boundary to optimise the IP stack. For
regular ethernet hardware, the constant NET_IP_ALIGN is used. On most
architectures this constant has the value 2 because the normal ethernet
header is 14 bytes long, so in order to get proper alignment one needs to
DMA to an address which can be expressed as 4*n + 2. One notable exception
here is powerpc which defines NET_IP_ALIGN to 0 because DMA to unaligned
addresses can be very expensive and dwarf the cost of unaligned loads.

For some ethernet hardware that cannot DMA to unaligned addresses like
4*n+2 or non-ethernet hardware, this can be a problem, and it is then
required to copy the incoming frame into an aligned buffer. Because this is
unnecessary on architectures that can do unaligned accesses, the code can be
made dependent on CONFIG_HAVE_EFFICIENT_UNALIGNED_ACCESS like so::

	#ifdef CONFIG_HAVE_EFFICIENT_UNALIGNED_ACCESS
		skb = original skb
	#else
		skb = copy skb
	#endif
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

====================
Union-Find in Linux
====================


:Date: June 21, 2024
:Author: Xavier <xavier_qy@163.com>

What is union-find, and what is it used for?
------------------------------------------------

Union-find is a data structure used to handle the merging and querying
of disjoint sets. The primary operations supported by union-find are:

	Initialization: Resetting each element as an individual set, with
		each set's initial parent node pointing to itself.

	Find: Determine which set a particular element belongs to, usually by
		returning a “representative element” of that set. This operation
		is used to check if two elements are in the same set.

	Union: Merge two sets into one.

As a data structure used to maintain sets (groups), union-find is commonly
utilized to solve problems related to offline queries, dynamic connectivity,
and graph theory. It is also a key component in Kruskal's algorithm for
computing the minimum spanning tree, which is crucial in scenarios like
network routing. Consequently, union-find is widely referenced. Additionally,
union-find has applications in symbolic computation, register allocation,
and more.

Space Complexity: O(n), where n is the number of nodes.

Time Complexity: Using path compression can reduce the time complexity of
the find operation, and using union by rank can reduce the time complexity
of the union operation. These optimizations reduce the average time
complexity of each find and union operation to O(α(n)), where α(n) is the
inverse Ackermann function. This can be roughly considered a constant time
complexity for practical purposes.

This document covers use of the Linux union-find implementation.  For more
information on the nature and implementation of union-find,  see:

  Wikipedia entry on union-find
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disjoint-set_data_structure

Linux implementation of union-find
-----------------------------------

Linux's union-find implementation resides in the file "lib/union_find.c".
To use it, "#include <linux/union_find.h>".

The union-find data structure is defined as follows::

	struct uf_node {
		struct uf_node *parent;
		unsigned int rank;
	};

In this structure, parent points to the parent node of the current node.
The rank field represents the height of the current tree. During a union
operation, the tree with the smaller rank is attached under the tree with the
larger rank to maintain balance.

Initializing union-find
-----------------------

You can complete the initialization using either static or initialization
interface. Initialize the parent pointer to point to itself and set the rank
to 0.
Example::

	struct uf_node my_node = UF_INIT_NODE(my_node);

or

	uf_node_init(&my_node);

Find the Root Node of union-find
--------------------------------

This operation is mainly used to determine whether two nodes belong to the same
set in the union-find. If they have the same root, they are in the same set.
During the find operation, path compression is performed to improve the
efficiency of subsequent find operations.
Example::

	int connected;
	struct uf_node *root1 = uf_find(&node_1);
	struct uf_node *root2 = uf_find(&node_2);
	if (root1 == root2)
		connected = 1;
	else
		connected = 0;

Union Two Sets in union-find
----------------------------

To union two sets in the union-find, you first find their respective root nodes
and then link the smaller node to the larger node based on the rank of the root
nodes.
Example::

	uf_union(&node_1, &node_2);
==============================
General notification mechanism
==============================

The general notification mechanism is built on top of the standard pipe driver
whereby it effectively splices notification messages from the kernel into pipes
opened by userspace.  This can be used in conjunction with::

  * Key/keyring notifications


The notifications buffers can be enabled by:

	"General setup"/"General notification queue"
	(CONFIG_WATCH_QUEUE)

This document has the following sections:

.. contents:: :local:


Overview
========

This facility appears as a pipe that is opened in a special mode.  The pipe's
internal ring buffer is used to hold messages that are generated by the kernel.
These messages are then read out by read().  Splice and similar are disabled on
such pipes due to them wanting to, under some circumstances, revert their
additions to the ring - which might end up interleaved with notification
messages.

The owner of the pipe has to tell the kernel which sources it would like to
watch through that pipe.  Only sources that have been connected to a pipe will
insert messages into it.  Note that a source may be bound to multiple pipes and
insert messages into all of them simultaneously.

Filters may also be emplaced on a pipe so that certain source types and
subevents can be ignored if they're not of interest.

A message will be discarded if there isn't a slot available in the ring or if
no preallocated message buffer is available.  In both of these cases, read()
will insert a WATCH_META_LOSS_NOTIFICATION message into the output buffer after
the last message currently in the buffer has been read.

Note that when producing a notification, the kernel does not wait for the
consumers to collect it, but rather just continues on.  This means that
notifications can be generated whilst spinlocks are held and also protects the
kernel from being held up indefinitely by a userspace malfunction.


Message Structure
=================

Notification messages begin with a short header::

	struct watch_notification {
		__u32	type:24;
		__u32	subtype:8;
		__u32	info;
	};

"type" indicates the source of the notification record and "subtype" indicates
the type of record from that source (see the Watch Sources section below).  The
type may also be "WATCH_TYPE_META".  This is a special record type generated
internally by the watch queue itself.  There are two subtypes:

  * WATCH_META_REMOVAL_NOTIFICATION
  * WATCH_META_LOSS_NOTIFICATION

The first indicates that an object on which a watch was installed was removed
or destroyed and the second indicates that some messages have been lost.

"info" indicates a bunch of things, including:

  * The length of the message in bytes, including the header (mask with
    WATCH_INFO_LENGTH and shift by WATCH_INFO_LENGTH__SHIFT).  This indicates
    the size of the record, which may be between 8 and 127 bytes.

  * The watch ID (mask with WATCH_INFO_ID and shift by WATCH_INFO_ID__SHIFT).
    This indicates that caller's ID of the watch, which may be between 0
    and 255.  Multiple watches may share a queue, and this provides a means to
    distinguish them.

  * A type-specific field (WATCH_INFO_TYPE_INFO).  This is set by the
    notification producer to indicate some meaning specific to the type and
    subtype.

Everything in info apart from the length can be used for filtering.

The header can be followed by supplementary information.  The format of this is
at the discretion is defined by the type and subtype.


Watch List (Notification Source) API
====================================

A "watch list" is a list of watchers that are subscribed to a source of
notifications.  A list may be attached to an object (say a key or a superblock)
or may be global (say for device events).  From a userspace perspective, a
non-global watch list is typically referred to by reference to the object it
belongs to (such as using KEYCTL_NOTIFY and giving it a key serial number to
watch that specific key).

To manage a watch list, the following functions are provided:

  * ::

	void init_watch_list(struct watch_list *wlist,
			     void (*release_watch)(struct watch *wlist));

    Initialise a watch list.  If ``release_watch`` is not NULL, then this
    indicates a function that should be called when the watch_list object is
    destroyed to discard any references the watch list holds on the watched
    object.

  * ``void remove_watch_list(struct watch_list *wlist);``

    This removes all of the watches subscribed to a watch_list and frees them
    and then destroys the watch_list object itself.


Watch Queue (Notification Output) API
=====================================

A "watch queue" is the buffer allocated by an application that notification
records will be written into.  The workings of this are hidden entirely inside
of the pipe device driver, but it is necessary to gain a reference to it to set
a watch.  These can be managed with:

  * ``struct watch_queue *get_watch_queue(int fd);``

    Since watch queues are indicated to the kernel by the fd of the pipe that
    implements the buffer, userspace must hand that fd through a system call.
    This can be used to look up an opaque pointer to the watch queue from the
    system call.

  * ``void put_watch_queue(struct watch_queue *wqueue);``

    This discards the reference obtained from ``get_watch_queue()``.


Watch Subscription API
======================

A "watch" is a subscription on a watch list, indicating the watch queue, and
thus the buffer, into which notification records should be written.  The watch
queue object may also carry filtering rules for that object, as set by
userspace.  Some parts of the watch struct can be set by the driver::

	struct watch {
		union {
			u32		info_id;	/* ID to be OR'd in to info field */
			...
		};
		void			*private;	/* Private data for the watched object */
		u64			id;		/* Internal identifier */
		...
	};

The ``info_id`` value should be an 8-bit number obtained from userspace and
shifted by WATCH_INFO_ID__SHIFT.  This is OR'd into the WATCH_INFO_ID field of
struct watch_notification::info when and if the notification is written into
the associated watch queue buffer.

The ``private`` field is the driver's data associated with the watch_list and
is cleaned up by the ``watch_list::release_watch()`` method.

The ``id`` field is the source's ID.  Notifications that are posted with a
different ID are ignored.

The following functions are provided to manage watches:

  * ``void init_watch(struct watch *watch, struct watch_queue *wqueue);``

    Initialise a watch object, setting its pointer to the watch queue, using
    appropriate barriering to avoid lockdep complaints.

  * ``int add_watch_to_object(struct watch *watch, struct watch_list *wlist);``

    Subscribe a watch to a watch list (notification source).  The
    driver-settable fields in the watch struct must have been set before this
    is called.

  * ::

	int remove_watch_from_object(struct watch_list *wlist,
				     struct watch_queue *wqueue,
				     u64 id, false);

    Remove a watch from a watch list, where the watch must match the specified
    watch queue (``wqueue``) and object identifier (``id``).  A notification
    (``WATCH_META_REMOVAL_NOTIFICATION``) is sent to the watch queue to
    indicate that the watch got removed.

  * ``int remove_watch_from_object(struct watch_list *wlist, NULL, 0, true);``

    Remove all the watches from a watch list.  It is expected that this will be
    called preparatory to destruction and that the watch list will be
    inaccessible to new watches by this point.  A notification
    (``WATCH_META_REMOVAL_NOTIFICATION``) is sent to the watch queue of each
    subscribed watch to indicate that the watch got removed.


Notification Posting API
========================

To post a notification to watch list so that the subscribed watches can see it,
the following function should be used::

	void post_watch_notification(struct watch_list *wlist,
				     struct watch_notification *n,
				     const struct cred *cred,
				     u64 id);

The notification should be preformatted and a pointer to the header (``n``)
should be passed in.  The notification may be larger than this and the size in
units of buffer slots is noted in ``n->info & WATCH_INFO_LENGTH``.

The ``cred`` struct indicates the credentials of the source (subject) and is
passed to the LSMs, such as SELinux, to allow or suppress the recording of the
note in each individual queue according to the credentials of that queue
(object).

The ``id`` is the ID of the source object (such as the serial number on a key).
Only watches that have the same ID set in them will see this notification.


Watch Sources
=============

Any particular buffer can be fed from multiple sources.  Sources include:

  * WATCH_TYPE_KEY_NOTIFY

    Notifications of this type indicate changes to keys and keyrings, including
    the changes of keyring contents or the attributes of keys.

    See Documentation/security/keys/core.rst for more information.


Event Filtering
===============

Once a watch queue has been created, a set of filters can be applied to limit
the events that are received using::

	struct watch_notification_filter filter = {
		...
	};
	ioctl(fd, IOC_WATCH_QUEUE_SET_FILTER, &filter)

The filter description is a variable of type::

	struct watch_notification_filter {
		__u32	nr_filters;
		__u32	__reserved;
		struct watch_notification_type_filter filters[];
	};

Where "nr_filters" is the number of filters in filters[] and "__reserved"
should be 0.  The "filters" array has elements of the following type::

	struct watch_notification_type_filter {
		__u32	type;
		__u32	info_filter;
		__u32	info_mask;
		__u32	subtype_filter[8];
	};

Where:

  * ``type`` is the event type to filter for and should be something like
    "WATCH_TYPE_KEY_NOTIFY"

  * ``info_filter`` and ``info_mask`` act as a filter on the info field of the
    notification record.  The notification is only written into the buffer if::

	(watch.info & info_mask) == info_filter

    This could be used, for example, to ignore events that are not exactly on
    the watched point in a mount tree.

  * ``subtype_filter`` is a bitmask indicating the subtypes that are of
    interest.  Bit 0 of subtype_filter[0] corresponds to subtype 0, bit 1 to
    subtype 1, and so on.

If the argument to the ioctl() is NULL, then the filters will be removed and
all events from the watched sources will come through.


Userspace Code Example
======================

A buffer is created with something like the following::

	pipe2(fds, O_TMPFILE);
	ioctl(fds[1], IOC_WATCH_QUEUE_SET_SIZE, 256);

It can then be set to receive keyring change notifications::

	keyctl(KEYCTL_WATCH_KEY, KEY_SPEC_SESSION_KEYRING, fds[1], 0x01);

The notifications can then be consumed by something like the following::

	static void consumer(int rfd, struct watch_queue_buffer *buf)
	{
		unsigned char buffer[128];
		ssize_t buf_len;

		while (buf_len = read(rfd, buffer, sizeof(buffer)),
		       buf_len > 0
		       ) {
			void *p = buffer;
			void *end = buffer + buf_len;
			while (p < end) {
				union {
					struct watch_notification n;
					unsigned char buf1[128];
				} n;
				size_t largest, len;

				largest = end - p;
				if (largest > 128)
					largest = 128;
				memcpy(&n, p, largest);

				len = (n->info & WATCH_INFO_LENGTH) >>
					WATCH_INFO_LENGTH__SHIFT;
				if (len == 0 || len > largest)
					return;

				switch (n.n.type) {
				case WATCH_TYPE_META:
					got_meta(&n.n);
				case WATCH_TYPE_KEY_NOTIFY:
					saw_key_change(&n.n);
					break;
				}

				p += len;
			}
		}
	}
=========
Workqueue
=========

:Date: September, 2010
:Author: Tejun Heo <tj@kernel.org>
:Author: Florian Mickler <florian@mickler.org>


Introduction
============

There are many cases where an asynchronous process execution context
is needed and the workqueue (wq) API is the most commonly used
mechanism for such cases.

When such an asynchronous execution context is needed, a work item
describing which function to execute is put on a queue.  An
independent thread serves as the asynchronous execution context.  The
queue is called workqueue and the thread is called worker.

While there are work items on the workqueue the worker executes the
functions associated with the work items one after the other.  When
there is no work item left on the workqueue the worker becomes idle.
When a new work item gets queued, the worker begins executing again.


Why Concurrency Managed Workqueue?
==================================

In the original wq implementation, a multi threaded (MT) wq had one
worker thread per CPU and a single threaded (ST) wq had one worker
thread system-wide.  A single MT wq needed to keep around the same
number of workers as the number of CPUs.  The kernel grew a lot of MT
wq users over the years and with the number of CPU cores continuously
rising, some systems saturated the default 32k PID space just booting
up.

Although MT wq wasted a lot of resource, the level of concurrency
provided was unsatisfactory.  The limitation was common to both ST and
MT wq albeit less severe on MT.  Each wq maintained its own separate
worker pool.  An MT wq could provide only one execution context per CPU
while an ST wq one for the whole system.  Work items had to compete for
those very limited execution contexts leading to various problems
including proneness to deadlocks around the single execution context.

The tension between the provided level of concurrency and resource
usage also forced its users to make unnecessary tradeoffs like libata
choosing to use ST wq for polling PIOs and accepting an unnecessary
limitation that no two polling PIOs can progress at the same time.  As
MT wq don't provide much better concurrency, users which require
higher level of concurrency, like async or fscache, had to implement
their own thread pool.

Concurrency Managed Workqueue (cmwq) is a reimplementation of wq with
focus on the following goals.

* Maintain compatibility with the original workqueue API.

* Use per-CPU unified worker pools shared by all wq to provide
  flexible level of concurrency on demand without wasting a lot of
  resource.

* Automatically regulate worker pool and level of concurrency so that
  the API users don't need to worry about such details.


The Design
==========

In order to ease the asynchronous execution of functions a new
abstraction, the work item, is introduced.

A work item is a simple struct that holds a pointer to the function
that is to be executed asynchronously.  Whenever a driver or subsystem
wants a function to be executed asynchronously it has to set up a work
item pointing to that function and queue that work item on a
workqueue.

A work item can be executed in either a thread or the BH (softirq) context.

For threaded workqueues, special purpose threads, called [k]workers, execute
the functions off of the queue, one after the other. If no work is queued,
the worker threads become idle. These worker threads are managed in
worker-pools.

The cmwq design differentiates between the user-facing workqueues that
subsystems and drivers queue work items on and the backend mechanism
which manages worker-pools and processes the queued work items.

There are two worker-pools, one for normal work items and the other
for high priority ones, for each possible CPU and some extra
worker-pools to serve work items queued on unbound workqueues - the
number of these backing pools is dynamic.

BH workqueues use the same framework. However, as there can only be one
concurrent execution context, there's no need to worry about concurrency.
Each per-CPU BH worker pool contains only one pseudo worker which represents
the BH execution context. A BH workqueue can be considered a convenience
interface to softirq.

Subsystems and drivers can create and queue work items through special
workqueue API functions as they see fit. They can influence some
aspects of the way the work items are executed by setting flags on the
workqueue they are putting the work item on. These flags include
things like CPU locality, concurrency limits, priority and more.  To
get a detailed overview refer to the API description of
``alloc_workqueue()`` below.

When a work item is queued to a workqueue, the target worker-pool is
determined according to the queue parameters and workqueue attributes
and appended on the shared worklist of the worker-pool.  For example,
unless specifically overridden, a work item of a bound workqueue will
be queued on the worklist of either normal or highpri worker-pool that
is associated to the CPU the issuer is running on.

For any thread pool implementation, managing the concurrency level
(how many execution contexts are active) is an important issue.  cmwq
tries to keep the concurrency at a minimal but sufficient level.
Minimal to save resources and sufficient in that the system is used at
its full capacity.

Each worker-pool bound to an actual CPU implements concurrency
management by hooking into the scheduler.  The worker-pool is notified
whenever an active worker wakes up or sleeps and keeps track of the
number of the currently runnable workers.  Generally, work items are
not expected to hog a CPU and consume many cycles.  That means
maintaining just enough concurrency to prevent work processing from
stalling should be optimal.  As long as there are one or more runnable
workers on the CPU, the worker-pool doesn't start execution of a new
work, but, when the last running worker goes to sleep, it immediately
schedules a new worker so that the CPU doesn't sit idle while there
are pending work items.  This allows using a minimal number of workers
without losing execution bandwidth.

Keeping idle workers around doesn't cost other than the memory space
for kthreads, so cmwq holds onto idle ones for a while before killing
them.

For unbound workqueues, the number of backing pools is dynamic.
Unbound workqueue can be assigned custom attributes using
``apply_workqueue_attrs()`` and workqueue will automatically create
backing worker pools matching the attributes.  The responsibility of
regulating concurrency level is on the users.  There is also a flag to
mark a bound wq to ignore the concurrency management.  Please refer to
the API section for details.

Forward progress guarantee relies on that workers can be created when
more execution contexts are necessary, which in turn is guaranteed
through the use of rescue workers.  All work items which might be used
on code paths that handle memory reclaim are required to be queued on
wq's that have a rescue-worker reserved for execution under memory
pressure.  Else it is possible that the worker-pool deadlocks waiting
for execution contexts to free up.


Application Programming Interface (API)
=======================================

``alloc_workqueue()`` allocates a wq.  The original
``create_*workqueue()`` functions are deprecated and scheduled for
removal.  ``alloc_workqueue()`` takes three arguments - ``@name``,
``@flags`` and ``@max_active``.  ``@name`` is the name of the wq and
also used as the name of the rescuer thread if there is one.

A wq no longer manages execution resources but serves as a domain for
forward progress guarantee, flush and work item attributes. ``@flags``
and ``@max_active`` control how work items are assigned execution
resources, scheduled and executed.


``flags``
---------

``WQ_BH``
  BH workqueues can be considered a convenience interface to softirq. BH
  workqueues are always per-CPU and all BH work items are executed in the
  queueing CPU's softirq context in the queueing order.

  All BH workqueues must have 0 ``max_active`` and ``WQ_HIGHPRI`` is the
  only allowed additional flag.

  BH work items cannot sleep. All other features such as delayed queueing,
  flushing and canceling are supported.

``WQ_UNBOUND``
  Work items queued to an unbound wq are served by the special
  worker-pools which host workers which are not bound to any
  specific CPU.  This makes the wq behave as a simple execution
  context provider without concurrency management.  The unbound
  worker-pools try to start execution of work items as soon as
  possible.  Unbound wq sacrifices locality but is useful for
  the following cases.

  * Wide fluctuation in the concurrency level requirement is
    expected and using bound wq may end up creating large number
    of mostly unused workers across different CPUs as the issuer
    hops through different CPUs.

  * Long running CPU intensive workloads which can be better
    managed by the system scheduler.

``WQ_FREEZABLE``
  A freezable wq participates in the freeze phase of the system
  suspend operations.  Work items on the wq are drained and no
  new work item starts execution until thawed.

``WQ_MEM_RECLAIM``
  All wq which might be used in the memory reclaim paths **MUST**
  have this flag set.  The wq is guaranteed to have at least one
  execution context regardless of memory pressure.

``WQ_HIGHPRI``
  Work items of a highpri wq are queued to the highpri
  worker-pool of the target cpu.  Highpri worker-pools are
  served by worker threads with elevated nice level.

  Note that normal and highpri worker-pools don't interact with
  each other.  Each maintains its separate pool of workers and
  implements concurrency management among its workers.

``WQ_CPU_INTENSIVE``
  Work items of a CPU intensive wq do not contribute to the
  concurrency level.  In other words, runnable CPU intensive
  work items will not prevent other work items in the same
  worker-pool from starting execution.  This is useful for bound
  work items which are expected to hog CPU cycles so that their
  execution is regulated by the system scheduler.

  Although CPU intensive work items don't contribute to the
  concurrency level, start of their executions is still
  regulated by the concurrency management and runnable
  non-CPU-intensive work items can delay execution of CPU
  intensive work items.

  This flag is meaningless for unbound wq.


``max_active``
--------------

``@max_active`` determines the maximum number of execution contexts per
CPU which can be assigned to the work items of a wq. For example, with
``@max_active`` of 16, at most 16 work items of the wq can be executing
at the same time per CPU. This is always a per-CPU attribute, even for
unbound workqueues.

The maximum limit for ``@max_active`` is 512 and the default value used
when 0 is specified is 256. These values are chosen sufficiently high
such that they are not the limiting factor while providing protection in
runaway cases.

The number of active work items of a wq is usually regulated by the
users of the wq, more specifically, by how many work items the users
may queue at the same time.  Unless there is a specific need for
throttling the number of active work items, specifying '0' is
recommended.

Some users depend on strict execution ordering where only one work item
is in flight at any given time and the work items are processed in
queueing order. While the combination of ``@max_active`` of 1 and
``WQ_UNBOUND`` used to achieve this behavior, this is no longer the
case. Use alloc_ordered_workqueue() instead.


Example Execution Scenarios
===========================

The following example execution scenarios try to illustrate how cmwq
behave under different configurations.

 Work items w0, w1, w2 are queued to a bound wq q0 on the same CPU.
 w0 burns CPU for 5ms then sleeps for 10ms then burns CPU for 5ms
 again before finishing.  w1 and w2 burn CPU for 5ms then sleep for
 10ms.

Ignoring all other tasks, works and processing overhead, and assuming
simple FIFO scheduling, the following is one highly simplified version
of possible sequences of events with the original wq. ::

 TIME IN MSECS	EVENT
 0		w0 starts and burns CPU
 5		w0 sleeps
 15		w0 wakes up and burns CPU
 20		w0 finishes
 20		w1 starts and burns CPU
 25		w1 sleeps
 35		w1 wakes up and finishes
 35		w2 starts and burns CPU
 40		w2 sleeps
 50		w2 wakes up and finishes

And with cmwq with ``@max_active`` >= 3, ::

 TIME IN MSECS	EVENT
 0		w0 starts and burns CPU
 5		w0 sleeps
 5		w1 starts and burns CPU
 10		w1 sleeps
 10		w2 starts and burns CPU
 15		w2 sleeps
 15		w0 wakes up and burns CPU
 20		w0 finishes
 20		w1 wakes up and finishes
 25		w2 wakes up and finishes

If ``@max_active`` == 2, ::

 TIME IN MSECS	EVENT
 0		w0 starts and burns CPU
 5		w0 sleeps
 5		w1 starts and burns CPU
 10		w1 sleeps
 15		w0 wakes up and burns CPU
 20		w0 finishes
 20		w1 wakes up and finishes
 20		w2 starts and burns CPU
 25		w2 sleeps
 35		w2 wakes up and finishes

Now, let's assume w1 and w2 are queued to a different wq q1 which has
``WQ_CPU_INTENSIVE`` set, ::

 TIME IN MSECS	EVENT
 0		w0 starts and burns CPU
 5		w0 sleeps
 5		w1 and w2 start and burn CPU
 10		w1 sleeps
 15		w2 sleeps
 15		w0 wakes up and burns CPU
 20		w0 finishes
 20		w1 wakes up and finishes
 25		w2 wakes up and finishes


Guidelines
==========

* Do not forget to use ``WQ_MEM_RECLAIM`` if a wq may process work
  items which are used during memory reclaim.  Each wq with
  ``WQ_MEM_RECLAIM`` set has an execution context reserved for it.  If
  there is dependency among multiple work items used during memory
  reclaim, they should be queued to separate wq each with
  ``WQ_MEM_RECLAIM``.

* Unless strict ordering is required, there is no need to use ST wq.

* Unless there is a specific need, using 0 for @max_active is
  recommended.  In most use cases, concurrency level usually stays
  well under the default limit.

* A wq serves as a domain for forward progress guarantee
  (``WQ_MEM_RECLAIM``, flush and work item attributes.  Work items
  which are not involved in memory reclaim and don't need to be
  flushed as a part of a group of work items, and don't require any
  special attribute, can use one of the system wq.  There is no
  difference in execution characteristics between using a dedicated wq
  and a system wq.

* Unless work items are expected to consume a huge amount of CPU
  cycles, using a bound wq is usually beneficial due to the increased
  level of locality in wq operations and work item execution.


Affinity Scopes
===============

An unbound workqueue groups CPUs according to its affinity scope to improve
cache locality. For example, if a workqueue is using the default affinity
scope of "cache", it will group CPUs according to last level cache
boundaries. A work item queued on the workqueue will be assigned to a worker
on one of the CPUs which share the last level cache with the issuing CPU.
Once started, the worker may or may not be allowed to move outside the scope
depending on the ``affinity_strict`` setting of the scope.

Workqueue currently supports the following affinity scopes.

``default``
  Use the scope in module parameter ``workqueue.default_affinity_scope``
  which is always set to one of the scopes below.

``cpu``
  CPUs are not grouped. A work item issued on one CPU is processed by a
  worker on the same CPU. This makes unbound workqueues behave as per-cpu
  workqueues without concurrency management.

``smt``
  CPUs are grouped according to SMT boundaries. This usually means that the
  logical threads of each physical CPU core are grouped together.

``cache``
  CPUs are grouped according to cache boundaries. Which specific cache
  boundary is used is determined by the arch code. L3 is used in a lot of
  cases. This is the default affinity scope.

``numa``
  CPUs are grouped according to NUMA boundaries.

``system``
  All CPUs are put in the same group. Workqueue makes no effort to process a
  work item on a CPU close to the issuing CPU.

The default affinity scope can be changed with the module parameter
``workqueue.default_affinity_scope`` and a specific workqueue's affinity
scope can be changed using ``apply_workqueue_attrs()``.

If ``WQ_SYSFS`` is set, the workqueue will have the following affinity scope
related interface files under its ``/sys/devices/virtual/workqueue/WQ_NAME/``
directory.

``affinity_scope``
  Read to see the current affinity scope. Write to change.

  When default is the current scope, reading this file will also show the
  current effective scope in parentheses, for example, ``default (cache)``.

``affinity_strict``
  0 by default indicating that affinity scopes are not strict. When a work
  item starts execution, workqueue makes a best-effort attempt to ensure
  that the worker is inside its affinity scope, which is called
  repatriation. Once started, the scheduler is free to move the worker
  anywhere in the system as it sees fit. This enables benefiting from scope
  locality while still being able to utilize other CPUs if necessary and
  available.

  If set to 1, all workers of the scope are guaranteed always to be in the
  scope. This may be useful when crossing affinity scopes has other
  implications, for example, in terms of power consumption or workload
  isolation. Strict NUMA scope can also be used to match the workqueue
  behavior of older kernels.


Affinity Scopes and Performance
===============================

It'd be ideal if an unbound workqueue's behavior is optimal for vast
majority of use cases without further tuning. Unfortunately, in the current
kernel, there exists a pronounced trade-off between locality and utilization
necessitating explicit configurations when workqueues are heavily used.

Higher locality leads to higher efficiency where more work is performed for
the same number of consumed CPU cycles. However, higher locality may also
cause lower overall system utilization if the work items are not spread
enough across the affinity scopes by the issuers. The following performance
testing with dm-crypt clearly illustrates this trade-off.

The tests are run on a CPU with 12-cores/24-threads split across four L3
caches (AMD Ryzen 9 3900x). CPU clock boost is turned off for consistency.
``/dev/dm-0`` is a dm-crypt device created on NVME SSD (Samsung 990 PRO) and
opened with ``cryptsetup`` with default settings.


Scenario 1: Enough issuers and work spread across the machine
-------------------------------------------------------------

The command used: ::

  $ fio --filename=/dev/dm-0 --direct=1 --rw=randrw --bs=32k --ioengine=libaio \
    --iodepth=64 --runtime=60 --numjobs=24 --time_based --group_reporting \
    --name=iops-test-job --verify=sha512

There are 24 issuers, each issuing 64 IOs concurrently. ``--verify=sha512``
makes ``fio`` generate and read back the content each time which makes
execution locality matter between the issuer and ``kcryptd``. The following
are the read bandwidths and CPU utilizations depending on different affinity
scope settings on ``kcryptd`` measured over five runs. Bandwidths are in
MiBps, and CPU util in percents.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 16 20 20
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Affinity
     - Bandwidth (MiBps)
     - CPU util (%)

   * - system
     - 1159.40 ±1.34
     - 99.31 ±0.02

   * - cache
     - 1166.40 ±0.89
     - 99.34 ±0.01

   * - cache (strict)
     - 1166.00 ±0.71
     - 99.35 ±0.01

With enough issuers spread across the system, there is no downside to
"cache", strict or otherwise. All three configurations saturate the whole
machine but the cache-affine ones outperform by 0.6% thanks to improved
locality.


Scenario 2: Fewer issuers, enough work for saturation
-----------------------------------------------------

The command used: ::

  $ fio --filename=/dev/dm-0 --direct=1 --rw=randrw --bs=32k \
    --ioengine=libaio --iodepth=64 --runtime=60 --numjobs=8 \
    --time_based --group_reporting --name=iops-test-job --verify=sha512

The only difference from the previous scenario is ``--numjobs=8``. There are
a third of the issuers but is still enough total work to saturate the
system.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 16 20 20
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Affinity
     - Bandwidth (MiBps)
     - CPU util (%)

   * - system
     - 1155.40 ±0.89
     - 97.41 ±0.05

   * - cache
     - 1154.40 ±1.14
     - 96.15 ±0.09

   * - cache (strict)
     - 1112.00 ±4.64
     - 93.26 ±0.35

This is more than enough work to saturate the system. Both "system" and
"cache" are nearly saturating the machine but not fully. "cache" is using
less CPU but the better efficiency puts it at the same bandwidth as
"system".

Eight issuers moving around over four L3 cache scope still allow "cache
(strict)" to mostly saturate the machine but the loss of work conservation
is now starting to hurt with 3.7% bandwidth loss.


Scenario 3: Even fewer issuers, not enough work to saturate
-----------------------------------------------------------

The command used: ::

  $ fio --filename=/dev/dm-0 --direct=1 --rw=randrw --bs=32k \
    --ioengine=libaio --iodepth=64 --runtime=60 --numjobs=4 \
    --time_based --group_reporting --name=iops-test-job --verify=sha512

Again, the only difference is ``--numjobs=4``. With the number of issuers
reduced to four, there now isn't enough work to saturate the whole system
and the bandwidth becomes dependent on completion latencies.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 16 20 20
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Affinity
     - Bandwidth (MiBps)
     - CPU util (%)

   * - system
     - 993.60 ±1.82
     - 75.49 ±0.06

   * - cache
     - 973.40 ±1.52
     - 74.90 ±0.07

   * - cache (strict)
     - 828.20 ±4.49
     - 66.84 ±0.29

Now, the tradeoff between locality and utilization is clearer. "cache" shows
2% bandwidth loss compared to "system" and "cache (struct)" whopping 20%.


Conclusion and Recommendations
------------------------------

In the above experiments, the efficiency advantage of the "cache" affinity
scope over "system" is, while consistent and noticeable, small. However, the
impact is dependent on the distances between the scopes and may be more
pronounced in processors with more complex topologies.

While the loss of work-conservation in certain scenarios hurts, it is a lot
better than "cache (strict)" and maximizing workqueue utilization is
unlikely to be the common case anyway. As such, "cache" is the default
affinity scope for unbound pools.

* As there is no one option which is great for most cases, workqueue usages
  that may consume a significant amount of CPU are recommended to configure
  the workqueues using ``apply_workqueue_attrs()`` and/or enable
  ``WQ_SYSFS``.

* An unbound workqueue with strict "cpu" affinity scope behaves the same as
  ``WQ_CPU_INTENSIVE`` per-cpu workqueue. There is no real advanage to the
  latter and an unbound workqueue provides a lot more flexibility.

* Affinity scopes are introduced in Linux v6.5. To emulate the previous
  behavior, use strict "numa" affinity scope.

* The loss of work-conservation in non-strict affinity scopes is likely
  originating from the scheduler. There is no theoretical reason why the
  kernel wouldn't be able to do the right thing and maintain
  work-conservation in most cases. As such, it is possible that future
  scheduler improvements may make most of these tunables unnecessary.


Examining Configuration
=======================

Use tools/workqueue/wq_dump.py to examine unbound CPU affinity
configuration, worker pools and how workqueues map to the pools: ::

  $ tools/workqueue/wq_dump.py
  Affinity Scopes
  ===============
  wq_unbound_cpumask=0000000f

  CPU
    nr_pods  4
    pod_cpus [0]=00000001 [1]=00000002 [2]=00000004 [3]=00000008
    pod_node [0]=0 [1]=0 [2]=1 [3]=1
    cpu_pod  [0]=0 [1]=1 [2]=2 [3]=3

  SMT
    nr_pods  4
    pod_cpus [0]=00000001 [1]=00000002 [2]=00000004 [3]=00000008
    pod_node [0]=0 [1]=0 [2]=1 [3]=1
    cpu_pod  [0]=0 [1]=1 [2]=2 [3]=3

  CACHE (default)
    nr_pods  2
    pod_cpus [0]=00000003 [1]=0000000c
    pod_node [0]=0 [1]=1
    cpu_pod  [0]=0 [1]=0 [2]=1 [3]=1

  NUMA
    nr_pods  2
    pod_cpus [0]=00000003 [1]=0000000c
    pod_node [0]=0 [1]=1
    cpu_pod  [0]=0 [1]=0 [2]=1 [3]=1

  SYSTEM
    nr_pods  1
    pod_cpus [0]=0000000f
    pod_node [0]=-1
    cpu_pod  [0]=0 [1]=0 [2]=0 [3]=0

  Worker Pools
  ============
  pool[00] ref= 1 nice=  0 idle/workers=  4/  4 cpu=  0
  pool[01] ref= 1 nice=-20 idle/workers=  2/  2 cpu=  0
  pool[02] ref= 1 nice=  0 idle/workers=  4/  4 cpu=  1
  pool[03] ref= 1 nice=-20 idle/workers=  2/  2 cpu=  1
  pool[04] ref= 1 nice=  0 idle/workers=  4/  4 cpu=  2
  pool[05] ref= 1 nice=-20 idle/workers=  2/  2 cpu=  2
  pool[06] ref= 1 nice=  0 idle/workers=  3/  3 cpu=  3
  pool[07] ref= 1 nice=-20 idle/workers=  2/  2 cpu=  3
  pool[08] ref=42 nice=  0 idle/workers=  6/  6 cpus=0000000f
  pool[09] ref=28 nice=  0 idle/workers=  3/  3 cpus=00000003
  pool[10] ref=28 nice=  0 idle/workers= 17/ 17 cpus=0000000c
  pool[11] ref= 1 nice=-20 idle/workers=  1/  1 cpus=0000000f
  pool[12] ref= 2 nice=-20 idle/workers=  1/  1 cpus=00000003
  pool[13] ref= 2 nice=-20 idle/workers=  1/  1 cpus=0000000c

  Workqueue CPU -> pool
  =====================
  [    workqueue \ CPU              0  1  2  3 dfl]
  events                   percpu   0  2  4  6
  events_highpri           percpu   1  3  5  7
  events_long              percpu   0  2  4  6
  events_unbound           unbound  9  9 10 10  8
  events_freezable         percpu   0  2  4  6
  events_power_efficient   percpu   0  2  4  6
  events_freezable_pwr_ef  percpu   0  2  4  6
  rcu_gp                   percpu   0  2  4  6
  rcu_par_gp               percpu   0  2  4  6
  slub_flushwq             percpu   0  2  4  6
  netns                    ordered  8  8  8  8  8
  ...

See the command's help message for more info.


Monitoring
==========

Use tools/workqueue/wq_monitor.py to monitor workqueue operations: ::

  $ tools/workqueue/wq_monitor.py events
                              total  infl  CPUtime  CPUhog CMW/RPR  mayday rescued
  events                      18545     0      6.1       0       5       -       -
  events_highpri                  8     0      0.0       0       0       -       -
  events_long                     3     0      0.0       0       0       -       -
  events_unbound              38306     0      0.1       -       7       -       -
  events_freezable                0     0      0.0       0       0       -       -
  events_power_efficient      29598     0      0.2       0       0       -       -
  events_freezable_pwr_ef        10     0      0.0       0       0       -       -
  sock_diag_events                0     0      0.0       0       0       -       -

                              total  infl  CPUtime  CPUhog CMW/RPR  mayday rescued
  events                      18548     0      6.1       0       5       -       -
  events_highpri                  8     0      0.0       0       0       -       -
  events_long                     3     0      0.0       0       0       -       -
  events_unbound              38322     0      0.1       -       7       -       -
  events_freezable                0     0      0.0       0       0       -       -
  events_power_efficient      29603     0      0.2       0       0       -       -
  events_freezable_pwr_ef        10     0      0.0       0       0       -       -
  sock_diag_events                0     0      0.0       0       0       -       -

  ...

See the command's help message for more info.


Debugging
=========

Because the work functions are executed by generic worker threads
there are a few tricks needed to shed some light on misbehaving
workqueue users.

Worker threads show up in the process list as: ::

  root      5671  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    12:07   0:00 [kworker/0:1]
  root      5672  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    12:07   0:00 [kworker/1:2]
  root      5673  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    12:12   0:00 [kworker/0:0]
  root      5674  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    12:13   0:00 [kworker/1:0]

If kworkers are going crazy (using too much cpu), there are two types
of possible problems:

	1. Something being scheduled in rapid succession
	2. A single work item that consumes lots of cpu cycles

The first one can be tracked using tracing: ::

	$ echo workqueue:workqueue_queue_work > /sys/kernel/tracing/set_event
	$ cat /sys/kernel/tracing/trace_pipe > out.txt
	(wait a few secs)
	^C

If something is busy looping on work queueing, it would be dominating
the output and the offender can be determined with the work item
function.

For the second type of problems it should be possible to just check
the stack trace of the offending worker thread. ::

	$ cat /proc/THE_OFFENDING_KWORKER/stack

The work item's function should be trivially visible in the stack
trace.


Non-reentrance Conditions
=========================

Workqueue guarantees that a work item cannot be re-entrant if the following
conditions hold after a work item gets queued:

        1. The work function hasn't been changed.
        2. No one queues the work item to another workqueue.
        3. The work item hasn't been reinitiated.

In other words, if the above conditions hold, the work item is guaranteed to be
executed by at most one worker system-wide at any given time.

Note that requeuing the work item (to the same queue) in the self function
doesn't break these conditions, so it's safe to do. Otherwise, caution is
required when breaking the conditions inside a work function.


Kernel Inline Documentations Reference
======================================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/workqueue.h

.. kernel-doc:: kernel/workqueue.c
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+

======
XArray
======

:Author: Matthew Wilcox

Overview
========

The XArray is an abstract data type which behaves like a very large array
of pointers.  It meets many of the same needs as a hash or a conventional
resizable array.  Unlike a hash, it allows you to sensibly go to the
next or previous entry in a cache-efficient manner.  In contrast to a
resizable array, there is no need to copy data or change MMU mappings in
order to grow the array.  It is more memory-efficient, parallelisable
and cache friendly than a doubly-linked list.  It takes advantage of
RCU to perform lookups without locking.

The XArray implementation is efficient when the indices used are densely
clustered; hashing the object and using the hash as the index will not
perform well.  The XArray is optimised for small indices, but still has
good performance with large indices.  If your index can be larger than
``ULONG_MAX`` then the XArray is not the data type for you.  The most
important user of the XArray is the page cache.

Normal pointers may be stored in the XArray directly.  They must be 4-byte
aligned, which is true for any pointer returned from kmalloc() and
alloc_page().  It isn't true for arbitrary user-space pointers,
nor for function pointers.  You can store pointers to statically allocated
objects, as long as those objects have an alignment of at least 4.

You can also store integers between 0 and ``LONG_MAX`` in the XArray.
You must first convert it into an entry using xa_mk_value().
When you retrieve an entry from the XArray, you can check whether it is
a value entry by calling xa_is_value(), and convert it back to
an integer by calling xa_to_value().

Some users want to tag the pointers they store in the XArray.  You can
call xa_tag_pointer() to create an entry with a tag, xa_untag_pointer()
to turn a tagged entry back into an untagged pointer and xa_pointer_tag()
to retrieve the tag of an entry.  Tagged pointers use the same bits that
are used to distinguish value entries from normal pointers, so you must
decide whether they want to store value entries or tagged pointers in
any particular XArray.

The XArray does not support storing IS_ERR() pointers as some
conflict with value entries or internal entries.

An unusual feature of the XArray is the ability to create entries which
occupy a range of indices.  Once stored to, looking up any index in
the range will return the same entry as looking up any other index in
the range.  Storing to any index will store to all of them.  Multi-index
entries can be explicitly split into smaller entries, or storing ``NULL``
into any entry will cause the XArray to forget about the range.

Normal API
==========

Start by initialising an XArray, either with DEFINE_XARRAY()
for statically allocated XArrays or xa_init() for dynamically
allocated ones.  A freshly-initialised XArray contains a ``NULL``
pointer at every index.

You can then set entries using xa_store() and get entries
using xa_load().  xa_store will overwrite any entry with the
new entry and return the previous entry stored at that index.  You can
use xa_erase() instead of calling xa_store() with a
``NULL`` entry.  There is no difference between an entry that has never
been stored to, one that has been erased and one that has most recently
had ``NULL`` stored to it.

You can conditionally replace an entry at an index by using
xa_cmpxchg().  Like cmpxchg(), it will only succeed if
the entry at that index has the 'old' value.  It also returns the entry
which was at that index; if it returns the same entry which was passed as
'old', then xa_cmpxchg() succeeded.

If you want to only store a new entry to an index if the current entry
at that index is ``NULL``, you can use xa_insert() which
returns ``-EBUSY`` if the entry is not empty.

You can copy entries out of the XArray into a plain array by calling
xa_extract().  Or you can iterate over the present entries in the XArray
by calling xa_for_each(), xa_for_each_start() or xa_for_each_range().
You may prefer to use xa_find() or xa_find_after() to move to the next
present entry in the XArray.

Calling xa_store_range() stores the same entry in a range
of indices.  If you do this, some of the other operations will behave
in a slightly odd way.  For example, marking the entry at one index
may result in the entry being marked at some, but not all of the other
indices.  Storing into one index may result in the entry retrieved by
some, but not all of the other indices changing.

Sometimes you need to ensure that a subsequent call to xa_store()
will not need to allocate memory.  The xa_reserve() function
will store a reserved entry at the indicated index.  Users of the
normal API will see this entry as containing ``NULL``.  If you do
not need to use the reserved entry, you can call xa_release()
to remove the unused entry.  If another user has stored to the entry
in the meantime, xa_release() will do nothing; if instead you
want the entry to become ``NULL``, you should use xa_erase().
Using xa_insert() on a reserved entry will fail.

If all entries in the array are ``NULL``, the xa_empty() function
will return ``true``.

Finally, you can remove all entries from an XArray by calling
xa_destroy().  If the XArray entries are pointers, you may wish
to free the entries first.  You can do this by iterating over all present
entries in the XArray using the xa_for_each() iterator.

Search Marks
------------

Each entry in the array has three bits associated with it called marks.
Each mark may be set or cleared independently of the others.  You can
iterate over marked entries by using the xa_for_each_marked() iterator.

You can enquire whether a mark is set on an entry by using
xa_get_mark().  If the entry is not ``NULL``, you can set a mark on it
by using xa_set_mark() and remove the mark from an entry by calling
xa_clear_mark().  You can ask whether any entry in the XArray has a
particular mark set by calling xa_marked().  Erasing an entry from the
XArray causes all marks associated with that entry to be cleared.

Setting or clearing a mark on any index of a multi-index entry will
affect all indices covered by that entry.  Querying the mark on any
index will return the same result.

There is no way to iterate over entries which are not marked; the data
structure does not allow this to be implemented efficiently.  There are
not currently iterators to search for logical combinations of bits (eg
iterate over all entries which have both ``XA_MARK_1`` and ``XA_MARK_2``
set, or iterate over all entries which have ``XA_MARK_0`` or ``XA_MARK_2``
set).  It would be possible to add these if a user arises.

Allocating XArrays
------------------

If you use DEFINE_XARRAY_ALLOC() to define the XArray, or
initialise it by passing ``XA_FLAGS_ALLOC`` to xa_init_flags(),
the XArray changes to track whether entries are in use or not.

You can call xa_alloc() to store the entry at an unused index
in the XArray.  If you need to modify the array from interrupt context,
you can use xa_alloc_bh() or xa_alloc_irq() to disable
interrupts while allocating the ID.

Using xa_store(), xa_cmpxchg() or xa_insert() will
also mark the entry as being allocated.  Unlike a normal XArray, storing
``NULL`` will mark the entry as being in use, like xa_reserve().
To free an entry, use xa_erase() (or xa_release() if
you only want to free the entry if it's ``NULL``).

By default, the lowest free entry is allocated starting from 0.  If you
want to allocate entries starting at 1, it is more efficient to use
DEFINE_XARRAY_ALLOC1() or ``XA_FLAGS_ALLOC1``.  If you want to
allocate IDs up to a maximum, then wrap back around to the lowest free
ID, you can use xa_alloc_cyclic().

You cannot use ``XA_MARK_0`` with an allocating XArray as this mark
is used to track whether an entry is free or not.  The other marks are
available for your use.

Memory allocation
-----------------

The xa_store(), xa_cmpxchg(), xa_alloc(),
xa_reserve() and xa_insert() functions take a gfp_t
parameter in case the XArray needs to allocate memory to store this entry.
If the entry is being deleted, no memory allocation needs to be performed,
and the GFP flags specified will be ignored.

It is possible for no memory to be allocatable, particularly if you pass
a restrictive set of GFP flags.  In that case, the functions return a
special value which can be turned into an errno using xa_err().
If you don't need to know exactly which error occurred, using
xa_is_err() is slightly more efficient.

Locking
-------

When using the Normal API, you do not have to worry about locking.
The XArray uses RCU and an internal spinlock to synchronise access:

No lock needed:
 * xa_empty()
 * xa_marked()

Takes RCU read lock:
 * xa_load()
 * xa_for_each()
 * xa_for_each_start()
 * xa_for_each_range()
 * xa_find()
 * xa_find_after()
 * xa_extract()
 * xa_get_mark()

Takes xa_lock internally:
 * xa_store()
 * xa_store_bh()
 * xa_store_irq()
 * xa_insert()
 * xa_insert_bh()
 * xa_insert_irq()
 * xa_erase()
 * xa_erase_bh()
 * xa_erase_irq()
 * xa_cmpxchg()
 * xa_cmpxchg_bh()
 * xa_cmpxchg_irq()
 * xa_store_range()
 * xa_alloc()
 * xa_alloc_bh()
 * xa_alloc_irq()
 * xa_reserve()
 * xa_reserve_bh()
 * xa_reserve_irq()
 * xa_destroy()
 * xa_set_mark()
 * xa_clear_mark()

Assumes xa_lock held on entry:
 * __xa_store()
 * __xa_insert()
 * __xa_erase()
 * __xa_cmpxchg()
 * __xa_alloc()
 * __xa_set_mark()
 * __xa_clear_mark()

If you want to take advantage of the lock to protect the data structures
that you are storing in the XArray, you can call xa_lock()
before calling xa_load(), then take a reference count on the
object you have found before calling xa_unlock().  This will
prevent stores from removing the object from the array between looking
up the object and incrementing the refcount.  You can also use RCU to
avoid dereferencing freed memory, but an explanation of that is beyond
the scope of this document.

The XArray does not disable interrupts or softirqs while modifying
the array.  It is safe to read the XArray from interrupt or softirq
context as the RCU lock provides enough protection.

If, for example, you want to store entries in the XArray in process
context and then erase them in softirq context, you can do that this way::

    void foo_init(struct foo *foo)
    {
        xa_init_flags(&foo->array, XA_FLAGS_LOCK_BH);
    }

    int foo_store(struct foo *foo, unsigned long index, void *entry)
    {
        int err;

        xa_lock_bh(&foo->array);
        err = xa_err(__xa_store(&foo->array, index, entry, GFP_KERNEL));
        if (!err)
            foo->count++;
        xa_unlock_bh(&foo->array);
        return err;
    }

    /* foo_erase() is only called from softirq context */
    void foo_erase(struct foo *foo, unsigned long index)
    {
        xa_lock(&foo->array);
        __xa_erase(&foo->array, index);
        foo->count--;
        xa_unlock(&foo->array);
    }

If you are going to modify the XArray from interrupt or softirq context,
you need to initialise the array using xa_init_flags(), passing
``XA_FLAGS_LOCK_IRQ`` or ``XA_FLAGS_LOCK_BH``.

The above example also shows a common pattern of wanting to extend the
coverage of the xa_lock on the store side to protect some statistics
associated with the array.

Sharing the XArray with interrupt context is also possible, either
using xa_lock_irqsave() in both the interrupt handler and process
context, or xa_lock_irq() in process context and xa_lock()
in the interrupt handler.  Some of the more common patterns have helper
functions such as xa_store_bh(), xa_store_irq(),
xa_erase_bh(), xa_erase_irq(), xa_cmpxchg_bh()
and xa_cmpxchg_irq().

Sometimes you need to protect access to the XArray with a mutex because
that lock sits above another mutex in the locking hierarchy.  That does
not entitle you to use functions like __xa_erase() without taking
the xa_lock; the xa_lock is used for lockdep validation and will be used
for other purposes in the future.

The __xa_set_mark() and __xa_clear_mark() functions are also
available for situations where you look up an entry and want to atomically
set or clear a mark.  It may be more efficient to use the advanced API
in this case, as it will save you from walking the tree twice.

Advanced API
============

The advanced API offers more flexibility and better performance at the
cost of an interface which can be harder to use and has fewer safeguards.
No locking is done for you by the advanced API, and you are required
to use the xa_lock while modifying the array.  You can choose whether
to use the xa_lock or the RCU lock while doing read-only operations on
the array.  You can mix advanced and normal operations on the same array;
indeed the normal API is implemented in terms of the advanced API.  The
advanced API is only available to modules with a GPL-compatible license.

The advanced API is based around the xa_state.  This is an opaque data
structure which you declare on the stack using the XA_STATE() macro.
This macro initialises the xa_state ready to start walking around the
XArray.  It is used as a cursor to maintain the position in the XArray
and let you compose various operations together without having to restart
from the top every time.  The contents of the xa_state are protected by
the rcu_read_lock() or the xas_lock().  If you need to drop whichever of
those locks is protecting your state and tree, you must call xas_pause()
so that future calls do not rely on the parts of the state which were
left unprotected.

The xa_state is also used to store errors.  You can call
xas_error() to retrieve the error.  All operations check whether
the xa_state is in an error state before proceeding, so there's no need
for you to check for an error after each call; you can make multiple
calls in succession and only check at a convenient point.  The only
errors currently generated by the XArray code itself are ``ENOMEM`` and
``EINVAL``, but it supports arbitrary errors in case you want to call
xas_set_err() yourself.

If the xa_state is holding an ``ENOMEM`` error, calling xas_nomem()
will attempt to allocate more memory using the specified gfp flags and
cache it in the xa_state for the next attempt.  The idea is that you take
the xa_lock, attempt the operation and drop the lock.  The operation
attempts to allocate memory while holding the lock, but it is more
likely to fail.  Once you have dropped the lock, xas_nomem()
can try harder to allocate more memory.  It will return ``true`` if it
is worth retrying the operation (i.e. that there was a memory error *and*
more memory was allocated).  If it has previously allocated memory, and
that memory wasn't used, and there is no error (or some error that isn't
``ENOMEM``), then it will free the memory previously allocated.

Internal Entries
----------------

The XArray reserves some entries for its own purposes.  These are never
exposed through the normal API, but when using the advanced API, it's
possible to see them.  Usually the best way to handle them is to pass them
to xas_retry(), and retry the operation if it returns ``true``.

.. flat-table::
   :widths: 1 1 6

   * - Name
     - Test
     - Usage

   * - Node
     - xa_is_node()
     - An XArray node.  May be visible when using a multi-index xa_state.

   * - Sibling
     - xa_is_sibling()
     - A non-canonical entry for a multi-index entry.  The value indicates
       which slot in this node has the canonical entry.

   * - Retry
     - xa_is_retry()
     - This entry is currently being modified by a thread which has the
       xa_lock.  The node containing this entry may be freed at the end
       of this RCU period.  You should restart the lookup from the head
       of the array.

   * - Zero
     - xa_is_zero()
     - Zero entries appear as ``NULL`` through the Normal API, but occupy
       an entry in the XArray which can be used to reserve the index for
       future use.  This is used by allocating XArrays for allocated entries
       which are ``NULL``.

Other internal entries may be added in the future.  As far as possible, they
will be handled by xas_retry().

Additional functionality
------------------------

The xas_create_range() function allocates all the necessary memory
to store every entry in a range.  It will set ENOMEM in the xa_state if
it cannot allocate memory.

You can use xas_init_marks() to reset the marks on an entry
to their default state.  This is usually all marks clear, unless the
XArray is marked with ``XA_FLAGS_TRACK_FREE``, in which case mark 0 is set
and all other marks are clear.  Replacing one entry with another using
xas_store() will not reset the marks on that entry; if you want
the marks reset, you should do that explicitly.

The xas_load() will walk the xa_state as close to the entry
as it can.  If you know the xa_state has already been walked to the
entry and need to check that the entry hasn't changed, you can use
xas_reload() to save a function call.

If you need to move to a different index in the XArray, call
xas_set().  This resets the cursor to the top of the tree, which
will generally make the next operation walk the cursor to the desired
spot in the tree.  If you want to move to the next or previous index,
call xas_next() or xas_prev().  Setting the index does
not walk the cursor around the array so does not require a lock to be
held, while moving to the next or previous index does.

You can search for the next present entry using xas_find().  This
is the equivalent of both xa_find() and xa_find_after();
if the cursor has been walked to an entry, then it will find the next
entry after the one currently referenced.  If not, it will return the
entry at the index of the xa_state.  Using xas_next_entry() to
move to the next present entry instead of xas_find() will save
a function call in the majority of cases at the expense of emitting more
inline code.

The xas_find_marked() function is similar.  If the xa_state has
not been walked, it will return the entry at the index of the xa_state,
if it is marked.  Otherwise, it will return the first marked entry after
the entry referenced by the xa_state.  The xas_next_marked()
function is the equivalent of xas_next_entry().

When iterating over a range of the XArray using xas_for_each()
or xas_for_each_marked(), it may be necessary to temporarily stop
the iteration.  The xas_pause() function exists for this purpose.
After you have done the necessary work and wish to resume, the xa_state
is in an appropriate state to continue the iteration after the entry
you last processed.  If you have interrupts disabled while iterating,
then it is good manners to pause the iteration and reenable interrupts
every ``XA_CHECK_SCHED`` entries.

The xas_get_mark(), xas_set_mark() and xas_clear_mark() functions require
the xa_state cursor to have been moved to the appropriate location in the
XArray; they will do nothing if you have called xas_pause() or xas_set()
immediately before.

You can call xas_set_update() to have a callback function
called each time the XArray updates a node.  This is used by the page
cache workingset code to maintain its list of nodes which contain only
shadow entries.

Multi-Index Entries
-------------------

The XArray has the ability to tie multiple indices together so that
operations on one index affect all indices.  For example, storing into
any index will change the value of the entry retrieved from any index.
Setting or clearing a mark on any index will set or clear the mark
on every index that is tied together.  The current implementation
only allows tying ranges which are aligned powers of two together;
eg indices 64-127 may be tied together, but 2-6 may not be.  This may
save substantial quantities of memory; for example tying 512 entries
together will save over 4kB.

You can create a multi-index entry by using XA_STATE_ORDER()
or xas_set_order() followed by a call to xas_store().
Calling xas_load() with a multi-index xa_state will walk the
xa_state to the right location in the tree, but the return value is not
meaningful, potentially being an internal entry or ``NULL`` even when there
is an entry stored within the range.  Calling xas_find_conflict()
will return the first entry within the range or ``NULL`` if there are no
entries in the range.  The xas_for_each_conflict() iterator will
iterate over every entry which overlaps the specified range.

If xas_load() encounters a multi-index entry, the xa_index
in the xa_state will not be changed.  When iterating over an XArray
or calling xas_find(), if the initial index is in the middle
of a multi-index entry, it will not be altered.  Subsequent calls
or iterations will move the index to the first index in the range.
Each entry will only be returned once, no matter how many indices it
occupies.

Using xas_next() or xas_prev() with a multi-index xa_state is not
supported.  Using either of these functions on a multi-index entry will
reveal sibling entries; these should be skipped over by the caller.

Storing ``NULL`` into any index of a multi-index entry will set the
entry at every index to ``NULL`` and dissolve the tie.  A multi-index
entry can be split into entries occupying smaller ranges by calling
xas_split_alloc() without the xa_lock held, followed by taking the lock
and calling xas_split().

Functions and structures
========================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/xarray.h
.. kernel-doc:: lib/xarray.c
================
Futex Requeue PI
================

Requeueing of tasks from a non-PI futex to a PI futex requires
special handling in order to ensure the underlying rt_mutex is never
left without an owner if it has waiters; doing so would break the PI
boosting logic [see rt-mutex-design.rst] For the purposes of
brevity, this action will be referred to as "requeue_pi" throughout
this document.  Priority inheritance is abbreviated throughout as
"PI".

Motivation
----------

Without requeue_pi, the glibc implementation of
pthread_cond_broadcast() must resort to waking all the tasks waiting
on a pthread_condvar and letting them try to sort out which task
gets to run first in classic thundering-herd formation.  An ideal
implementation would wake the highest-priority waiter, and leave the
rest to the natural wakeup inherent in unlocking the mutex
associated with the condvar.

Consider the simplified glibc calls::

	/* caller must lock mutex */
	pthread_cond_wait(cond, mutex)
	{
		lock(cond->__data.__lock);
		unlock(mutex);
		do {
		unlock(cond->__data.__lock);
		futex_wait(cond->__data.__futex);
		lock(cond->__data.__lock);
		} while(...)
		unlock(cond->__data.__lock);
		lock(mutex);
	}

	pthread_cond_broadcast(cond)
	{
		lock(cond->__data.__lock);
		unlock(cond->__data.__lock);
		futex_requeue(cond->data.__futex, cond->mutex);
	}

Once pthread_cond_broadcast() requeues the tasks, the cond->mutex
has waiters. Note that pthread_cond_wait() attempts to lock the
mutex only after it has returned to user space.  This will leave the
underlying rt_mutex with waiters, and no owner, breaking the
previously mentioned PI-boosting algorithms.

In order to support PI-aware pthread_condvar's, the kernel needs to
be able to requeue tasks to PI futexes.  This support implies that
upon a successful futex_wait system call, the caller would return to
user space already holding the PI futex.  The glibc implementation
would be modified as follows::


	/* caller must lock mutex */
	pthread_cond_wait_pi(cond, mutex)
	{
		lock(cond->__data.__lock);
		unlock(mutex);
		do {
		unlock(cond->__data.__lock);
		futex_wait_requeue_pi(cond->__data.__futex);
		lock(cond->__data.__lock);
		} while(...)
		unlock(cond->__data.__lock);
		/* the kernel acquired the mutex for us */
	}

	pthread_cond_broadcast_pi(cond)
	{
		lock(cond->__data.__lock);
		unlock(cond->__data.__lock);
		futex_requeue_pi(cond->data.__futex, cond->mutex);
	}

The actual glibc implementation will likely test for PI and make the
necessary changes inside the existing calls rather than creating new
calls for the PI cases.  Similar changes are needed for
pthread_cond_timedwait() and pthread_cond_signal().

Implementation
--------------

In order to ensure the rt_mutex has an owner if it has waiters, it
is necessary for both the requeue code, as well as the waiting code,
to be able to acquire the rt_mutex before returning to user space.
The requeue code cannot simply wake the waiter and leave it to
acquire the rt_mutex as it would open a race window between the
requeue call returning to user space and the waiter waking and
starting to run.  This is especially true in the uncontended case.

The solution involves two new rt_mutex helper routines,
rt_mutex_start_proxy_lock() and rt_mutex_finish_proxy_lock(), which
allow the requeue code to acquire an uncontended rt_mutex on behalf
of the waiter and to enqueue the waiter on a contended rt_mutex.
Two new system calls provide the kernel<->user interface to
requeue_pi: FUTEX_WAIT_REQUEUE_PI and FUTEX_CMP_REQUEUE_PI.

FUTEX_WAIT_REQUEUE_PI is called by the waiter (pthread_cond_wait()
and pthread_cond_timedwait()) to block on the initial futex and wait
to be requeued to a PI-aware futex.  The implementation is the
result of a high-speed collision between futex_wait() and
futex_lock_pi(), with some extra logic to check for the additional
wake-up scenarios.

FUTEX_CMP_REQUEUE_PI is called by the waker
(pthread_cond_broadcast() and pthread_cond_signal()) to requeue and
possibly wake the waiting tasks. Internally, this system call is
still handled by futex_requeue (by passing requeue_pi=1).  Before
requeueing, futex_requeue() attempts to acquire the requeue target
PI futex on behalf of the top waiter.  If it can, this waiter is
woken.  futex_requeue() then proceeds to requeue the remaining
nr_wake+nr_requeue tasks to the PI futex, calling
rt_mutex_start_proxy_lock() prior to each requeue to prepare the
task as a waiter on the underlying rt_mutex.  It is possible that
the lock can be acquired at this stage as well, if so, the next
waiter is woken to finish the acquisition of the lock.

FUTEX_CMP_REQUEUE_PI accepts nr_wake and nr_requeue as arguments, but
their sum is all that really matters.  futex_requeue() will wake or
requeue up to nr_wake + nr_requeue tasks.  It will wake only as many
tasks as it can acquire the lock for, which in the majority of cases
should be 0 as good programming practice dictates that the caller of
either pthread_cond_broadcast() or pthread_cond_signal() acquire the
mutex prior to making the call. FUTEX_CMP_REQUEUE_PI requires that
nr_wake=1.  nr_requeue should be INT_MAX for broadcast and 0 for
signal.
===========================
Hardware Spinlock Framework
===========================

Introduction
============

Hardware spinlock modules provide hardware assistance for synchronization
and mutual exclusion between heterogeneous processors and those not operating
under a single, shared operating system.

For example, OMAP4 has dual Cortex-A9, dual Cortex-M3 and a C64x+ DSP,
each of which is running a different Operating System (the master, A9,
is usually running Linux and the slave processors, the M3 and the DSP,
are running some flavor of RTOS).

A generic hwspinlock framework allows platform-independent drivers to use
the hwspinlock device in order to access data structures that are shared
between remote processors, that otherwise have no alternative mechanism
to accomplish synchronization and mutual exclusion operations.

This is necessary, for example, for Inter-processor communications:
on OMAP4, cpu-intensive multimedia tasks are offloaded by the host to the
remote M3 and/or C64x+ slave processors (by an IPC subsystem called Syslink).

To achieve fast message-based communications, a minimal kernel support
is needed to deliver messages arriving from a remote processor to the
appropriate user process.

This communication is based on simple data structures that is shared between
the remote processors, and access to it is synchronized using the hwspinlock
module (remote processor directly places new messages in this shared data
structure).

A common hwspinlock interface makes it possible to have generic, platform-
independent, drivers.

User API
========

::

  struct hwspinlock *hwspin_lock_request(void);

Dynamically assign an hwspinlock and return its address, or NULL
in case an unused hwspinlock isn't available. Users of this
API will usually want to communicate the lock's id to the remote core
before it can be used to achieve synchronization.

Should be called from a process context (might sleep).

::

  struct hwspinlock *hwspin_lock_request_specific(unsigned int id);

Assign a specific hwspinlock id and return its address, or NULL
if that hwspinlock is already in use. Usually board code will
be calling this function in order to reserve specific hwspinlock
ids for predefined purposes.

Should be called from a process context (might sleep).

::

  int of_hwspin_lock_get_id(struct device_node *np, int index);

Retrieve the global lock id for an OF phandle-based specific lock.
This function provides a means for DT users of a hwspinlock module
to get the global lock id of a specific hwspinlock, so that it can
be requested using the normal hwspin_lock_request_specific() API.

The function returns a lock id number on success, -EPROBE_DEFER if
the hwspinlock device is not yet registered with the core, or other
error values.

Should be called from a process context (might sleep).

::

  int hwspin_lock_free(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);

Free a previously-assigned hwspinlock; returns 0 on success, or an
appropriate error code on failure (e.g. -EINVAL if the hwspinlock
is already free).

Should be called from a process context (might sleep).

::

  int hwspin_lock_bust(struct hwspinlock *hwlock, unsigned int id);

After verifying the owner of the hwspinlock, release a previously acquired
hwspinlock; returns 0 on success, or an appropriate error code on failure
(e.g. -EOPNOTSUPP if the bust operation is not defined for the specific
hwspinlock).

Should be called from a process context (might sleep).

::

  int hwspin_lock_timeout(struct hwspinlock *hwlock, unsigned int timeout);

Lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock with a timeout limit (specified in
msecs). If the hwspinlock is already taken, the function will busy loop
waiting for it to be released, but give up when the timeout elapses.
Upon a successful return from this function, preemption is disabled so
the caller must not sleep, and is advised to release the hwspinlock as
soon as possible, in order to minimize remote cores polling on the
hardware interconnect.

Returns 0 when successful and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -ETIMEDOUT if the hwspinlock is still busy after timeout msecs).
The function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_lock_timeout_irq(struct hwspinlock *hwlock, unsigned int timeout);

Lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock with a timeout limit (specified in
msecs). If the hwspinlock is already taken, the function will busy loop
waiting for it to be released, but give up when the timeout elapses.
Upon a successful return from this function, preemption and the local
interrupts are disabled, so the caller must not sleep, and is advised to
release the hwspinlock as soon as possible.

Returns 0 when successful and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -ETIMEDOUT if the hwspinlock is still busy after timeout msecs).
The function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_lock_timeout_irqsave(struct hwspinlock *hwlock, unsigned int to,
				  unsigned long *flags);

Lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock with a timeout limit (specified in
msecs). If the hwspinlock is already taken, the function will busy loop
waiting for it to be released, but give up when the timeout elapses.
Upon a successful return from this function, preemption is disabled,
local interrupts are disabled and their previous state is saved at the
given flags placeholder. The caller must not sleep, and is advised to
release the hwspinlock as soon as possible.

Returns 0 when successful and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -ETIMEDOUT if the hwspinlock is still busy after timeout msecs).

The function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_lock_timeout_raw(struct hwspinlock *hwlock, unsigned int timeout);

Lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock with a timeout limit (specified in
msecs). If the hwspinlock is already taken, the function will busy loop
waiting for it to be released, but give up when the timeout elapses.

Caution: User must protect the routine of getting hardware lock with mutex
or spinlock to avoid dead-lock, that will let user can do some time-consuming
or sleepable operations under the hardware lock.

Returns 0 when successful and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -ETIMEDOUT if the hwspinlock is still busy after timeout msecs).

The function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_lock_timeout_in_atomic(struct hwspinlock *hwlock, unsigned int to);

Lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock with a timeout limit (specified in
msecs). If the hwspinlock is already taken, the function will busy loop
waiting for it to be released, but give up when the timeout elapses.

This function shall be called only from an atomic context and the timeout
value shall not exceed a few msecs.

Returns 0 when successful and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -ETIMEDOUT if the hwspinlock is still busy after timeout msecs).

The function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_trylock(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);


Attempt to lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock, but immediately fail if
it is already taken.

Upon a successful return from this function, preemption is disabled so
caller must not sleep, and is advised to release the hwspinlock as soon as
possible, in order to minimize remote cores polling on the hardware
interconnect.

Returns 0 on success and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -EBUSY if the hwspinlock was already taken).
The function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_trylock_irq(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);


Attempt to lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock, but immediately fail if
it is already taken.

Upon a successful return from this function, preemption and the local
interrupts are disabled so caller must not sleep, and is advised to
release the hwspinlock as soon as possible.

Returns 0 on success and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -EBUSY if the hwspinlock was already taken).

The function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_trylock_irqsave(struct hwspinlock *hwlock, unsigned long *flags);

Attempt to lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock, but immediately fail if
it is already taken.

Upon a successful return from this function, preemption is disabled,
the local interrupts are disabled and their previous state is saved
at the given flags placeholder. The caller must not sleep, and is advised
to release the hwspinlock as soon as possible.

Returns 0 on success and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -EBUSY if the hwspinlock was already taken).
The function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_trylock_raw(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);

Attempt to lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock, but immediately fail if
it is already taken.

Caution: User must protect the routine of getting hardware lock with mutex
or spinlock to avoid dead-lock, that will let user can do some time-consuming
or sleepable operations under the hardware lock.

Returns 0 on success and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -EBUSY if the hwspinlock was already taken).
The function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_trylock_in_atomic(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);

Attempt to lock a previously-assigned hwspinlock, but immediately fail if
it is already taken.

This function shall be called only from an atomic context.

Returns 0 on success and an appropriate error code otherwise (most
notably -EBUSY if the hwspinlock was already taken).
The function will never sleep.

::

  void hwspin_unlock(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);

Unlock a previously-locked hwspinlock. Always succeed, and can be called
from any context (the function never sleeps).

.. note::

  code should **never** unlock an hwspinlock which is already unlocked
  (there is no protection against this).

::

  void hwspin_unlock_irq(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);

Unlock a previously-locked hwspinlock and enable local interrupts.
The caller should **never** unlock an hwspinlock which is already unlocked.

Doing so is considered a bug (there is no protection against this).
Upon a successful return from this function, preemption and local
interrupts are enabled. This function will never sleep.

::

  void
  hwspin_unlock_irqrestore(struct hwspinlock *hwlock, unsigned long *flags);

Unlock a previously-locked hwspinlock.

The caller should **never** unlock an hwspinlock which is already unlocked.
Doing so is considered a bug (there is no protection against this).
Upon a successful return from this function, preemption is reenabled,
and the state of the local interrupts is restored to the state saved at
the given flags. This function will never sleep.

::

  void hwspin_unlock_raw(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);

Unlock a previously-locked hwspinlock.

The caller should **never** unlock an hwspinlock which is already unlocked.
Doing so is considered a bug (there is no protection against this).
This function will never sleep.

::

  void hwspin_unlock_in_atomic(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);

Unlock a previously-locked hwspinlock.

The caller should **never** unlock an hwspinlock which is already unlocked.
Doing so is considered a bug (there is no protection against this).
This function will never sleep.

::

  int hwspin_lock_get_id(struct hwspinlock *hwlock);

Retrieve id number of a given hwspinlock. This is needed when an
hwspinlock is dynamically assigned: before it can be used to achieve
mutual exclusion with a remote cpu, the id number should be communicated
to the remote task with which we want to synchronize.

Returns the hwspinlock id number, or -EINVAL if hwlock is null.

Typical usage
=============

::

	#include <linux/hwspinlock.h>
	#include <linux/err.h>

	int hwspinlock_example1(void)
	{
		struct hwspinlock *hwlock;
		int ret;

		/* dynamically assign a hwspinlock */
		hwlock = hwspin_lock_request();
		if (!hwlock)
			...

		id = hwspin_lock_get_id(hwlock);
		/* probably need to communicate id to a remote processor now */

		/* take the lock, spin for 1 sec if it's already taken */
		ret = hwspin_lock_timeout(hwlock, 1000);
		if (ret)
			...

		/*
		* we took the lock, do our thing now, but do NOT sleep
		*/

		/* release the lock */
		hwspin_unlock(hwlock);

		/* free the lock */
		ret = hwspin_lock_free(hwlock);
		if (ret)
			...

		return ret;
	}

	int hwspinlock_example2(void)
	{
		struct hwspinlock *hwlock;
		int ret;

		/*
		* assign a specific hwspinlock id - this should be called early
		* by board init code.
		*/
		hwlock = hwspin_lock_request_specific(PREDEFINED_LOCK_ID);
		if (!hwlock)
			...

		/* try to take it, but don't spin on it */
		ret = hwspin_trylock(hwlock);
		if (!ret) {
			pr_info("lock is already taken\n");
			return -EBUSY;
		}

		/*
		* we took the lock, do our thing now, but do NOT sleep
		*/

		/* release the lock */
		hwspin_unlock(hwlock);

		/* free the lock */
		ret = hwspin_lock_free(hwlock);
		if (ret)
			...

		return ret;
	}


API for implementors
====================

::

  int hwspin_lock_register(struct hwspinlock_device *bank, struct device *dev,
		const struct hwspinlock_ops *ops, int base_id, int num_locks);

To be called from the underlying platform-specific implementation, in
order to register a new hwspinlock device (which is usually a bank of
numerous locks). Should be called from a process context (this function
might sleep).

Returns 0 on success, or appropriate error code on failure.

::

  int hwspin_lock_unregister(struct hwspinlock_device *bank);

To be called from the underlying vendor-specific implementation, in order
to unregister an hwspinlock device (which is usually a bank of numerous
locks).

Should be called from a process context (this function might sleep).

Returns the address of hwspinlock on success, or NULL on error (e.g.
if the hwspinlock is still in use).

Important structs
=================

struct hwspinlock_device is a device which usually contains a bank
of hardware locks. It is registered by the underlying hwspinlock
implementation using the hwspin_lock_register() API.

::

	/**
	* struct hwspinlock_device - a device which usually spans numerous hwspinlocks
	* @dev: underlying device, will be used to invoke runtime PM api
	* @ops: platform-specific hwspinlock handlers
	* @base_id: id index of the first lock in this device
	* @num_locks: number of locks in this device
	* @lock: dynamically allocated array of 'struct hwspinlock'
	*/
	struct hwspinlock_device {
		struct device *dev;
		const struct hwspinlock_ops *ops;
		int base_id;
		int num_locks;
		struct hwspinlock lock[0];
	};

struct hwspinlock_device contains an array of hwspinlock structs, each
of which represents a single hardware lock::

	/**
	* struct hwspinlock - this struct represents a single hwspinlock instance
	* @bank: the hwspinlock_device structure which owns this lock
	* @lock: initialized and used by hwspinlock core
	* @priv: private data, owned by the underlying platform-specific hwspinlock drv
	*/
	struct hwspinlock {
		struct hwspinlock_device *bank;
		spinlock_t lock;
		void *priv;
	};

When registering a bank of locks, the hwspinlock driver only needs to
set the priv members of the locks. The rest of the members are set and
initialized by the hwspinlock core itself.

Implementation callbacks
========================

There are three possible callbacks defined in 'struct hwspinlock_ops'::

	struct hwspinlock_ops {
		int (*trylock)(struct hwspinlock *lock);
		void (*unlock)(struct hwspinlock *lock);
		void (*relax)(struct hwspinlock *lock);
	};

The first two callbacks are mandatory:

The ->trylock() callback should make a single attempt to take the lock, and
return 0 on failure and 1 on success. This callback may **not** sleep.

The ->unlock() callback releases the lock. It always succeed, and it, too,
may **not** sleep.

The ->relax() callback is optional. It is called by hwspinlock core while
spinning on a lock, and can be used by the underlying implementation to force
a delay between two successive invocations of ->trylock(). It may **not** sleep.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=======
Locking
=======

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    locktypes
    lockdep-design
    lockstat
    locktorture
    mutex-design
    rt-mutex-design
    rt-mutex
    seqlock
    spinlocks
    ww-mutex-design
    preempt-locking
    pi-futex
    futex-requeue-pi
    hwspinlock
    percpu-rw-semaphore
    robust-futexes
    robust-futex-ABI

.. only::  subproject and html

   Indices
   =======

   * :ref:`genindex`
Runtime locking correctness validator
=====================================

started by Ingo Molnar <mingo@redhat.com>

additions by Arjan van de Ven <arjan@linux.intel.com>

Lock-class
----------

The basic object the validator operates upon is a 'class' of locks.

A class of locks is a group of locks that are logically the same with
respect to locking rules, even if the locks may have multiple (possibly
tens of thousands of) instantiations. For example a lock in the inode
struct is one class, while each inode has its own instantiation of that
lock class.

The validator tracks the 'usage state' of lock-classes, and it tracks
the dependencies between different lock-classes. Lock usage indicates
how a lock is used with regard to its IRQ contexts, while lock
dependency can be understood as lock order, where L1 -> L2 suggests that
a task is attempting to acquire L2 while holding L1. From lockdep's
perspective, the two locks (L1 and L2) are not necessarily related; that
dependency just means the order ever happened. The validator maintains a
continuing effort to prove lock usages and dependencies are correct or
the validator will shoot a splat if incorrect.

A lock-class's behavior is constructed by its instances collectively:
when the first instance of a lock-class is used after bootup the class
gets registered, then all (subsequent) instances will be mapped to the
class and hence their usages and dependencies will contribute to those of
the class. A lock-class does not go away when a lock instance does, but
it can be removed if the memory space of the lock class (static or
dynamic) is reclaimed, this happens for example when a module is
unloaded or a workqueue is destroyed.

State
-----

The validator tracks lock-class usage history and divides the usage into
(4 usages * n STATEs + 1) categories:

where the 4 usages can be:

- 'ever held in STATE context'
- 'ever held as readlock in STATE context'
- 'ever held with STATE enabled'
- 'ever held as readlock with STATE enabled'

where the n STATEs are coded in kernel/locking/lockdep_states.h and as of
now they include:

- hardirq
- softirq

where the last 1 category is:

- 'ever used'                                       [ == !unused        ]

When locking rules are violated, these usage bits are presented in the
locking error messages, inside curlies, with a total of 2 * n STATEs bits.
A contrived example::

   modprobe/2287 is trying to acquire lock:
    (&sio_locks[i].lock){-.-.}, at: [<c02867fd>] mutex_lock+0x21/0x24

   but task is already holding lock:
    (&sio_locks[i].lock){-.-.}, at: [<c02867fd>] mutex_lock+0x21/0x24


For a given lock, the bit positions from left to right indicate the usage
of the lock and readlock (if exists), for each of the n STATEs listed
above respectively, and the character displayed at each bit position
indicates:

   ===  ===================================================
   '.'  acquired while irqs disabled and not in irq context
   '-'  acquired in irq context
   '+'  acquired with irqs enabled
   '?'  acquired in irq context with irqs enabled.
   ===  ===================================================

The bits are illustrated with an example::

    (&sio_locks[i].lock){-.-.}, at: [<c02867fd>] mutex_lock+0x21/0x24
                         ||||
                         ||| \-> softirq disabled and not in softirq context
                         || \--> acquired in softirq context
                         | \---> hardirq disabled and not in hardirq context
                          \----> acquired in hardirq context


For a given STATE, whether the lock is ever acquired in that STATE
context and whether that STATE is enabled yields four possible cases as
shown in the table below. The bit character is able to indicate which
exact case is for the lock as of the reporting time.

  +--------------+-------------+--------------+
  |              | irq enabled | irq disabled |
  +--------------+-------------+--------------+
  | ever in irq  |     '?'     |      '-'     |
  +--------------+-------------+--------------+
  | never in irq |     '+'     |      '.'     |
  +--------------+-------------+--------------+

The character '-' suggests irq is disabled because if otherwise the
character '?' would have been shown instead. Similar deduction can be
applied for '+' too.

Unused locks (e.g., mutexes) cannot be part of the cause of an error.


Single-lock state rules:
------------------------

A lock is irq-safe means it was ever used in an irq context, while a lock
is irq-unsafe means it was ever acquired with irq enabled.

A softirq-unsafe lock-class is automatically hardirq-unsafe as well. The
following states must be exclusive: only one of them is allowed to be set
for any lock-class based on its usage::

 <hardirq-safe> or <hardirq-unsafe>
 <softirq-safe> or <softirq-unsafe>

This is because if a lock can be used in irq context (irq-safe) then it
cannot be ever acquired with irq enabled (irq-unsafe). Otherwise, a
deadlock may happen. For example, in the scenario that after this lock
was acquired but before released, if the context is interrupted this
lock will be attempted to acquire twice, which creates a deadlock,
referred to as lock recursion deadlock.

The validator detects and reports lock usage that violates these
single-lock state rules.

Multi-lock dependency rules:
----------------------------

The same lock-class must not be acquired twice, because this could lead
to lock recursion deadlocks.

Furthermore, two locks can not be taken in inverse order::

 <L1> -> <L2>
 <L2> -> <L1>

because this could lead to a deadlock - referred to as lock inversion
deadlock - as attempts to acquire the two locks form a circle which
could lead to the two contexts waiting for each other permanently. The
validator will find such dependency circle in arbitrary complexity,
i.e., there can be any other locking sequence between the acquire-lock
operations; the validator will still find whether these locks can be
acquired in a circular fashion.

Furthermore, the following usage based lock dependencies are not allowed
between any two lock-classes::

   <hardirq-safe>   ->  <hardirq-unsafe>
   <softirq-safe>   ->  <softirq-unsafe>

The first rule comes from the fact that a hardirq-safe lock could be
taken by a hardirq context, interrupting a hardirq-unsafe lock - and
thus could result in a lock inversion deadlock. Likewise, a softirq-safe
lock could be taken by an softirq context, interrupting a softirq-unsafe
lock.

The above rules are enforced for any locking sequence that occurs in the
kernel: when acquiring a new lock, the validator checks whether there is
any rule violation between the new lock and any of the held locks.

When a lock-class changes its state, the following aspects of the above
dependency rules are enforced:

- if a new hardirq-safe lock is discovered, we check whether it
  took any hardirq-unsafe lock in the past.

- if a new softirq-safe lock is discovered, we check whether it took
  any softirq-unsafe lock in the past.

- if a new hardirq-unsafe lock is discovered, we check whether any
  hardirq-safe lock took it in the past.

- if a new softirq-unsafe lock is discovered, we check whether any
  softirq-safe lock took it in the past.

(Again, we do these checks too on the basis that an interrupt context
could interrupt _any_ of the irq-unsafe or hardirq-unsafe locks, which
could lead to a lock inversion deadlock - even if that lock scenario did
not trigger in practice yet.)

Exception: Nested data dependencies leading to nested locking
-------------------------------------------------------------

There are a few cases where the Linux kernel acquires more than one
instance of the same lock-class. Such cases typically happen when there
is some sort of hierarchy within objects of the same type. In these
cases there is an inherent "natural" ordering between the two objects
(defined by the properties of the hierarchy), and the kernel grabs the
locks in this fixed order on each of the objects.

An example of such an object hierarchy that results in "nested locking"
is that of a "whole disk" block-dev object and a "partition" block-dev
object; the partition is "part of" the whole device and as long as one
always takes the whole disk lock as a higher lock than the partition
lock, the lock ordering is fully correct. The validator does not
automatically detect this natural ordering, as the locking rule behind
the ordering is not static.

In order to teach the validator about this correct usage model, new
versions of the various locking primitives were added that allow you to
specify a "nesting level". An example call, for the block device mutex,
looks like this::

  enum bdev_bd_mutex_lock_class
  {
       BD_MUTEX_NORMAL,
       BD_MUTEX_WHOLE,
       BD_MUTEX_PARTITION
  };

  mutex_lock_nested(&bdev->bd_contains->bd_mutex, BD_MUTEX_PARTITION);

In this case the locking is done on a bdev object that is known to be a
partition.

The validator treats a lock that is taken in such a nested fashion as a
separate (sub)class for the purposes of validation.

Note: When changing code to use the _nested() primitives, be careful and
check really thoroughly that the hierarchy is correctly mapped; otherwise
you can get false positives or false negatives.

Annotations
-----------

Two constructs can be used to annotate and check where and if certain locks
must be held: lockdep_assert_held*(&lock) and lockdep_*pin_lock(&lock).

As the name suggests, lockdep_assert_held* family of macros assert that a
particular lock is held at a certain time (and generate a WARN() otherwise).
This annotation is largely used all over the kernel, e.g. kernel/sched/
core.c::

  void update_rq_clock(struct rq *rq)
  {
	s64 delta;

	lockdep_assert_held(&rq->lock);
	[...]
  }

where holding rq->lock is required to safely update a rq's clock.

The other family of macros is lockdep_*pin_lock(), which is admittedly only
used for rq->lock ATM. Despite their limited adoption these annotations
generate a WARN() if the lock of interest is "accidentally" unlocked. This turns
out to be especially helpful to debug code with callbacks, where an upper
layer assumes a lock remains taken, but a lower layer thinks it can maybe drop
and reacquire the lock ("unwittingly" introducing races). lockdep_pin_lock()
returns a 'struct pin_cookie' that is then used by lockdep_unpin_lock() to check
that nobody tampered with the lock, e.g. kernel/sched/sched.h::

  static inline void rq_pin_lock(struct rq *rq, struct rq_flags *rf)
  {
	rf->cookie = lockdep_pin_lock(&rq->lock);
	[...]
  }

  static inline void rq_unpin_lock(struct rq *rq, struct rq_flags *rf)
  {
	[...]
	lockdep_unpin_lock(&rq->lock, rf->cookie);
  }

While comments about locking requirements might provide useful information,
the runtime checks performed by annotations are invaluable when debugging
locking problems and they carry the same level of details when inspecting
code.  Always prefer annotations when in doubt!

Proof of 100% correctness:
--------------------------

The validator achieves perfect, mathematical 'closure' (proof of locking
correctness) in the sense that for every simple, standalone single-task
locking sequence that occurred at least once during the lifetime of the
kernel, the validator proves it with a 100% certainty that no
combination and timing of these locking sequences can cause any class of
lock related deadlock. [1]_

I.e. complex multi-CPU and multi-task locking scenarios do not have to
occur in practice to prove a deadlock: only the simple 'component'
locking chains have to occur at least once (anytime, in any
task/context) for the validator to be able to prove correctness. (For
example, complex deadlocks that would normally need more than 3 CPUs and
a very unlikely constellation of tasks, irq-contexts and timings to
occur, can be detected on a plain, lightly loaded single-CPU system as
well!)

This radically decreases the complexity of locking related QA of the
kernel: what has to be done during QA is to trigger as many "simple"
single-task locking dependencies in the kernel as possible, at least
once, to prove locking correctness - instead of having to trigger every
possible combination of locking interaction between CPUs, combined with
every possible hardirq and softirq nesting scenario (which is impossible
to do in practice).

.. [1]

    assuming that the validator itself is 100% correct, and no other
    part of the system corrupts the state of the validator in any way.
    We also assume that all NMI/SMM paths [which could interrupt
    even hardirq-disabled codepaths] are correct and do not interfere
    with the validator. We also assume that the 64-bit 'chain hash'
    value is unique for every lock-chain in the system. Also, lock
    recursion must not be higher than 20.

Performance:
------------

The above rules require **massive** amounts of runtime checking. If we did
that for every lock taken and for every irqs-enable event, it would
render the system practically unusably slow. The complexity of checking
is O(N^2), so even with just a few hundred lock-classes we'd have to do
tens of thousands of checks for every event.

This problem is solved by checking any given 'locking scenario' (unique
sequence of locks taken after each other) only once. A simple stack of
held locks is maintained, and a lightweight 64-bit hash value is
calculated, which hash is unique for every lock chain. The hash value,
when the chain is validated for the first time, is then put into a hash
table, which hash-table can be checked in a lockfree manner. If the
locking chain occurs again later on, the hash table tells us that we
don't have to validate the chain again.

Troubleshooting:
----------------

The validator tracks a maximum of MAX_LOCKDEP_KEYS number of lock classes.
Exceeding this number will trigger the following lockdep warning::

	(DEBUG_LOCKS_WARN_ON(id >= MAX_LOCKDEP_KEYS))

By default, MAX_LOCKDEP_KEYS is currently set to 8191, and typical
desktop systems have less than 1,000 lock classes, so this warning
normally results from lock-class leakage or failure to properly
initialize locks.  These two problems are illustrated below:

1.	Repeated module loading and unloading while running the validator
	will result in lock-class leakage.  The issue here is that each
	load of the module will create a new set of lock classes for
	that module's locks, but module unloading does not remove old
	classes (see below discussion of reuse of lock classes for why).
	Therefore, if that module is loaded and unloaded repeatedly,
	the number of lock classes will eventually reach the maximum.

2.	Using structures such as arrays that have large numbers of
	locks that are not explicitly initialized.  For example,
	a hash table with 8192 buckets where each bucket has its own
	spinlock_t will consume 8192 lock classes -unless- each spinlock
	is explicitly initialized at runtime, for example, using the
	run-time spin_lock_init() as opposed to compile-time initializers
	such as __SPIN_LOCK_UNLOCKED().  Failure to properly initialize
	the per-bucket spinlocks would guarantee lock-class overflow.
	In contrast, a loop that called spin_lock_init() on each lock
	would place all 8192 locks into a single lock class.

	The moral of this story is that you should always explicitly
	initialize your locks.

One might argue that the validator should be modified to allow
lock classes to be reused.  However, if you are tempted to make this
argument, first review the code and think through the changes that would
be required, keeping in mind that the lock classes to be removed are
likely to be linked into the lock-dependency graph.  This turns out to
be harder to do than to say.

Of course, if you do run out of lock classes, the next thing to do is
to find the offending lock classes.  First, the following command gives
you the number of lock classes currently in use along with the maximum::

	grep "lock-classes" /proc/lockdep_stats

This command produces the following output on a modest system::

	lock-classes:                          748 [max: 8191]

If the number allocated (748 above) increases continually over time,
then there is likely a leak.  The following command can be used to
identify the leaking lock classes::

	grep "BD" /proc/lockdep

Run the command and save the output, then compare against the output from
a later run of this command to identify the leakers.  This same output
can also help you find situations where runtime lock initialization has
been omitted.

Recursive read locks:
---------------------
The whole of the rest document tries to prove a certain type of cycle is equivalent
to deadlock possibility.

There are three types of lockers: writers (i.e. exclusive lockers, like
spin_lock() or write_lock()), non-recursive readers (i.e. shared lockers, like
down_read()) and recursive readers (recursive shared lockers, like rcu_read_lock()).
And we use the following notations of those lockers in the rest of the document:

	W or E:	stands for writers (exclusive lockers).
	r:	stands for non-recursive readers.
	R:	stands for recursive readers.
	S:	stands for all readers (non-recursive + recursive), as both are shared lockers.
	N:	stands for writers and non-recursive readers, as both are not recursive.

Obviously, N is "r or W" and S is "r or R".

Recursive readers, as their name indicates, are the lockers allowed to acquire
even inside the critical section of another reader of the same lock instance,
in other words, allowing nested read-side critical sections of one lock instance.

While non-recursive readers will cause a self deadlock if trying to acquire inside
the critical section of another reader of the same lock instance.

The difference between recursive readers and non-recursive readers is because:
recursive readers get blocked only by a write lock *holder*, while non-recursive
readers could get blocked by a write lock *waiter*. Considering the follow
example::

	TASK A:			TASK B:

	read_lock(X);
				write_lock(X);
	read_lock_2(X);

Task A gets the reader (no matter whether recursive or non-recursive) on X via
read_lock() first. And when task B tries to acquire writer on X, it will block
and become a waiter for writer on X. Now if read_lock_2() is recursive readers,
task A will make progress, because writer waiters don't block recursive readers,
and there is no deadlock. However, if read_lock_2() is non-recursive readers,
it will get blocked by writer waiter B, and cause a self deadlock.

Block conditions on readers/writers of the same lock instance:
--------------------------------------------------------------
There are simply four block conditions:

1.	Writers block other writers.
2.	Readers block writers.
3.	Writers block both recursive readers and non-recursive readers.
4.	And readers (recursive or not) don't block other recursive readers but
	may block non-recursive readers (because of the potential co-existing
	writer waiters)

Block condition matrix, Y means the row blocks the column, and N means otherwise.

	+---+---+---+---+
	|   | W | r | R |
	+---+---+---+---+
	| W | Y | Y | Y |
	+---+---+---+---+
	| r | Y | Y | N |
	+---+---+---+---+
	| R | Y | Y | N |
	+---+---+---+---+

	(W: writers, r: non-recursive readers, R: recursive readers)


acquired recursively. Unlike non-recursive read locks, recursive read locks
only get blocked by current write lock *holders* other than write lock
*waiters*, for example::

	TASK A:			TASK B:

	read_lock(X);

				write_lock(X);

	read_lock(X);

is not a deadlock for recursive read locks, as while the task B is waiting for
the lock X, the second read_lock() doesn't need to wait because it's a recursive
read lock. However if the read_lock() is non-recursive read lock, then the above
case is a deadlock, because even if the write_lock() in TASK B cannot get the
lock, but it can block the second read_lock() in TASK A.

Note that a lock can be a write lock (exclusive lock), a non-recursive read
lock (non-recursive shared lock) or a recursive read lock (recursive shared
lock), depending on the lock operations used to acquire it (more specifically,
the value of the 'read' parameter for lock_acquire()). In other words, a single
lock instance has three types of acquisition depending on the acquisition
functions: exclusive, non-recursive read, and recursive read.

To be concise, we call that write locks and non-recursive read locks as
"non-recursive" locks and recursive read locks as "recursive" locks.

Recursive locks don't block each other, while non-recursive locks do (this is
even true for two non-recursive read locks). A non-recursive lock can block the
corresponding recursive lock, and vice versa.

A deadlock case with recursive locks involved is as follow::

	TASK A:			TASK B:

	read_lock(X);
				read_lock(Y);
	write_lock(Y);
				write_lock(X);

Task A is waiting for task B to read_unlock() Y and task B is waiting for task
A to read_unlock() X.

Dependency types and strong dependency paths:
---------------------------------------------
Lock dependencies record the orders of the acquisitions of a pair of locks, and
because there are 3 types for lockers, there are, in theory, 9 types of lock
dependencies, but we can show that 4 types of lock dependencies are enough for
deadlock detection.

For each lock dependency::

	L1 -> L2

, which means lockdep has seen L1 held before L2 held in the same context at runtime.
And in deadlock detection, we care whether we could get blocked on L2 with L1 held,
IOW, whether there is a locker L3 that L1 blocks L3 and L2 gets blocked by L3. So
we only care about 1) what L1 blocks and 2) what blocks L2. As a result, we can combine
recursive readers and non-recursive readers for L1 (as they block the same types) and
we can combine writers and non-recursive readers for L2 (as they get blocked by the
same types).

With the above combination for simplification, there are 4 types of dependency edges
in the lockdep graph:

1) -(ER)->:
	    exclusive writer to recursive reader dependency, "X -(ER)-> Y" means
	    X -> Y and X is a writer and Y is a recursive reader.

2) -(EN)->:
	    exclusive writer to non-recursive locker dependency, "X -(EN)-> Y" means
	    X -> Y and X is a writer and Y is either a writer or non-recursive reader.

3) -(SR)->:
	    shared reader to recursive reader dependency, "X -(SR)-> Y" means
	    X -> Y and X is a reader (recursive or not) and Y is a recursive reader.

4) -(SN)->:
	    shared reader to non-recursive locker dependency, "X -(SN)-> Y" means
	    X -> Y and X is a reader (recursive or not) and Y is either a writer or
	    non-recursive reader.

Note that given two locks, they may have multiple dependencies between them,
for example::

	TASK A:

	read_lock(X);
	write_lock(Y);
	...

	TASK B:

	write_lock(X);
	write_lock(Y);

, we have both X -(SN)-> Y and X -(EN)-> Y in the dependency graph.

We use -(xN)-> to represent edges that are either -(EN)-> or -(SN)->, the
similar for -(Ex)->, -(xR)-> and -(Sx)->

A "path" is a series of conjunct dependency edges in the graph. And we define a
"strong" path, which indicates the strong dependency throughout each dependency
in the path, as the path that doesn't have two conjunct edges (dependencies) as
-(xR)-> and -(Sx)->. In other words, a "strong" path is a path from a lock
walking to another through the lock dependencies, and if X -> Y -> Z is in the
path (where X, Y, Z are locks), and the walk from X to Y is through a -(SR)-> or
-(ER)-> dependency, the walk from Y to Z must not be through a -(SN)-> or
-(SR)-> dependency.

We will see why the path is called "strong" in next section.

Recursive Read Deadlock Detection:
----------------------------------

We now prove two things:

Lemma 1:

If there is a closed strong path (i.e. a strong circle), then there is a
combination of locking sequences that causes deadlock. I.e. a strong circle is
sufficient for deadlock detection.

Lemma 2:

If there is no closed strong path (i.e. strong circle), then there is no
combination of locking sequences that could cause deadlock. I.e.  strong
circles are necessary for deadlock detection.

With these two Lemmas, we can easily say a closed strong path is both sufficient
and necessary for deadlocks, therefore a closed strong path is equivalent to
deadlock possibility. As a closed strong path stands for a dependency chain that
could cause deadlocks, so we call it "strong", considering there are dependency
circles that won't cause deadlocks.

Proof for sufficiency (Lemma 1):

Let's say we have a strong circle::

	L1 -> L2 ... -> Ln -> L1

, which means we have dependencies::

	L1 -> L2
	L2 -> L3
	...
	Ln-1 -> Ln
	Ln -> L1

We now can construct a combination of locking sequences that cause deadlock:

Firstly let's make one CPU/task get the L1 in L1 -> L2, and then another get
the L2 in L2 -> L3, and so on. After this, all of the Lx in Lx -> Lx+1 are
held by different CPU/tasks.

And then because we have L1 -> L2, so the holder of L1 is going to acquire L2
in L1 -> L2, however since L2 is already held by another CPU/task, plus L1 ->
L2 and L2 -> L3 are not -(xR)-> and -(Sx)-> (the definition of strong), which
means either L2 in L1 -> L2 is a non-recursive locker (blocked by anyone) or
the L2 in L2 -> L3, is writer (blocking anyone), therefore the holder of L1
cannot get L2, it has to wait L2's holder to release.

Moreover, we can have a similar conclusion for L2's holder: it has to wait L3's
holder to release, and so on. We now can prove that Lx's holder has to wait for
Lx+1's holder to release, and note that Ln+1 is L1, so we have a circular
waiting scenario and nobody can get progress, therefore a deadlock.

Proof for necessary (Lemma 2):

Lemma 2 is equivalent to: If there is a deadlock scenario, then there must be a
strong circle in the dependency graph.

According to Wikipedia[1], if there is a deadlock, then there must be a circular
waiting scenario, means there are N CPU/tasks, where CPU/task P1 is waiting for
a lock held by P2, and P2 is waiting for a lock held by P3, ... and Pn is waiting
for a lock held by P1. Let's name the lock Px is waiting as Lx, so since P1 is waiting
for L1 and holding Ln, so we will have Ln -> L1 in the dependency graph. Similarly,
we have L1 -> L2, L2 -> L3, ..., Ln-1 -> Ln in the dependency graph, which means we
have a circle::

	Ln -> L1 -> L2 -> ... -> Ln

, and now let's prove the circle is strong:

For a lock Lx, Px contributes the dependency Lx-1 -> Lx and Px+1 contributes
the dependency Lx -> Lx+1, and since Px is waiting for Px+1 to release Lx,
so it's impossible that Lx on Px+1 is a reader and Lx on Px is a recursive
reader, because readers (no matter recursive or not) don't block recursive
readers, therefore Lx-1 -> Lx and Lx -> Lx+1 cannot be a -(xR)-> -(Sx)-> pair,
and this is true for any lock in the circle, therefore, the circle is strong.

References:
-----------
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deadlock
[2]: Shibu, K. (2009). Intro To Embedded Systems (1st ed.). Tata McGraw-Hill
===============
Lock Statistics
===============

What
====

As the name suggests, it provides statistics on locks.


Why
===

Because things like lock contention can severely impact performance.

How
===

Lockdep already has hooks in the lock functions and maps lock instances to
lock classes. We build on that (see Documentation/locking/lockdep-design.rst).
The graph below shows the relation between the lock functions and the various
hooks therein::

        __acquire
            |
           lock _____
            |        \
            |    __contended
            |         |
            |       <wait>
            | _______/
            |/
            |
       __acquired
            |
            .
          <hold>
            .
            |
       __release
            |
         unlock

  lock, unlock	- the regular lock functions
  __*		- the hooks
  <> 		- states

With these hooks we provide the following statistics:

 con-bounces
	- number of lock contention that involved x-cpu data
 contentions
	- number of lock acquisitions that had to wait
 wait time
     min
	- shortest (non-0) time we ever had to wait for a lock
     max
	- longest time we ever had to wait for a lock
     total
	- total time we spend waiting on this lock
     avg
	- average time spent waiting on this lock
 acq-bounces
	- number of lock acquisitions that involved x-cpu data
 acquisitions
	- number of times we took the lock
 hold time
     min
	- shortest (non-0) time we ever held the lock
     max
	- longest time we ever held the lock
     total
	- total time this lock was held
     avg
	- average time this lock was held

These numbers are gathered per lock class, per read/write state (when
applicable).

It also tracks 4 contention points per class. A contention point is a call site
that had to wait on lock acquisition.

Configuration
-------------

Lock statistics are enabled via CONFIG_LOCK_STAT.

Usage
-----

Enable collection of statistics::

	# echo 1 >/proc/sys/kernel/lock_stat

Disable collection of statistics::

	# echo 0 >/proc/sys/kernel/lock_stat

Look at the current lock statistics::

  ( line numbers not part of actual output, done for clarity in the explanation
    below )

  # less /proc/lock_stat

  01 lock_stat version 0.4
  02-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  03                              class name    con-bounces    contentions   waittime-min   waittime-max waittime-total   waittime-avg    acq-bounces   acquisitions   holdtime-min   holdtime-max holdtime-total   holdtime-avg
  04-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  05
  06                         &mm->mmap_sem-W:            46             84           0.26         939.10       16371.53         194.90          47291        2922365           0.16     2220301.69 17464026916.32        5975.99
  07                         &mm->mmap_sem-R:            37            100           1.31      299502.61      325629.52        3256.30         212344       34316685           0.10        7744.91    95016910.20           2.77
  08                         ---------------
  09                           &mm->mmap_sem              1          [<ffffffff811502a7>] khugepaged_scan_mm_slot+0x57/0x280
  10                           &mm->mmap_sem             96          [<ffffffff815351c4>] __do_page_fault+0x1d4/0x510
  11                           &mm->mmap_sem             34          [<ffffffff81113d77>] vm_mmap_pgoff+0x87/0xd0
  12                           &mm->mmap_sem             17          [<ffffffff81127e71>] vm_munmap+0x41/0x80
  13                         ---------------
  14                           &mm->mmap_sem              1          [<ffffffff81046fda>] dup_mmap+0x2a/0x3f0
  15                           &mm->mmap_sem             60          [<ffffffff81129e29>] SyS_mprotect+0xe9/0x250
  16                           &mm->mmap_sem             41          [<ffffffff815351c4>] __do_page_fault+0x1d4/0x510
  17                           &mm->mmap_sem             68          [<ffffffff81113d77>] vm_mmap_pgoff+0x87/0xd0
  18
  19.............................................................................................................................................................................................................................
  20
  21                         unix_table_lock:           110            112           0.21          49.24         163.91           1.46          21094          66312           0.12         624.42       31589.81           0.48
  22                         ---------------
  23                         unix_table_lock             45          [<ffffffff8150ad8e>] unix_create1+0x16e/0x1b0
  24                         unix_table_lock             47          [<ffffffff8150b111>] unix_release_sock+0x31/0x250
  25                         unix_table_lock             15          [<ffffffff8150ca37>] unix_find_other+0x117/0x230
  26                         unix_table_lock              5          [<ffffffff8150a09f>] unix_autobind+0x11f/0x1b0
  27                         ---------------
  28                         unix_table_lock             39          [<ffffffff8150b111>] unix_release_sock+0x31/0x250
  29                         unix_table_lock             49          [<ffffffff8150ad8e>] unix_create1+0x16e/0x1b0
  30                         unix_table_lock             20          [<ffffffff8150ca37>] unix_find_other+0x117/0x230
  31                         unix_table_lock              4          [<ffffffff8150a09f>] unix_autobind+0x11f/0x1b0


This excerpt shows the first two lock class statistics. Line 01 shows the
output version - each time the format changes this will be updated. Line 02-04
show the header with column descriptions. Lines 05-18 and 20-31 show the actual
statistics. These statistics come in two parts; the actual stats separated by a
short separator (line 08, 13) from the contention points.

Lines 09-12 show the first 4 recorded contention points (the code
which tries to get the lock) and lines 14-17 show the first 4 recorded
contended points (the lock holder). It is possible that the max
con-bounces point is missing in the statistics.

The first lock (05-18) is a read/write lock, and shows two lines above the
short separator. The contention points don't match the column descriptors,
they have two: contentions and [<IP>] symbol. The second set of contention
points are the points we're contending with.

The integer part of the time values is in us.

Dealing with nested locks, subclasses may appear::

  32...........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
  33
  34                               &rq->lock:       13128          13128           0.43         190.53      103881.26           7.91          97454        3453404           0.00         401.11    13224683.11           3.82
  35                               ---------
  36                               &rq->lock          645          [<ffffffff8103bfc4>] task_rq_lock+0x43/0x75
  37                               &rq->lock          297          [<ffffffff8104ba65>] try_to_wake_up+0x127/0x25a
  38                               &rq->lock          360          [<ffffffff8103c4c5>] select_task_rq_fair+0x1f0/0x74a
  39                               &rq->lock          428          [<ffffffff81045f98>] scheduler_tick+0x46/0x1fb
  40                               ---------
  41                               &rq->lock           77          [<ffffffff8103bfc4>] task_rq_lock+0x43/0x75
  42                               &rq->lock          174          [<ffffffff8104ba65>] try_to_wake_up+0x127/0x25a
  43                               &rq->lock         4715          [<ffffffff8103ed4b>] double_rq_lock+0x42/0x54
  44                               &rq->lock          893          [<ffffffff81340524>] schedule+0x157/0x7b8
  45
  46...........................................................................................................................................................................................................................
  47
  48                             &rq->lock/1:        1526          11488           0.33         388.73      136294.31          11.86          21461          38404           0.00          37.93      109388.53           2.84
  49                             -----------
  50                             &rq->lock/1        11526          [<ffffffff8103ed58>] double_rq_lock+0x4f/0x54
  51                             -----------
  52                             &rq->lock/1         5645          [<ffffffff8103ed4b>] double_rq_lock+0x42/0x54
  53                             &rq->lock/1         1224          [<ffffffff81340524>] schedule+0x157/0x7b8
  54                             &rq->lock/1         4336          [<ffffffff8103ed58>] double_rq_lock+0x4f/0x54
  55                             &rq->lock/1          181          [<ffffffff8104ba65>] try_to_wake_up+0x127/0x25a

Line 48 shows statistics for the second subclass (/1) of &rq->lock class
(subclass starts from 0), since in this case, as line 50 suggests,
double_rq_lock actually acquires a nested lock of two spinlocks.

View the top contending locks::

  # grep : /proc/lock_stat | head
			clockevents_lock:       2926159        2947636           0.15       46882.81  1784540466.34         605.41        3381345        3879161           0.00        2260.97    53178395.68          13.71
		     tick_broadcast_lock:        346460         346717           0.18        2257.43    39364622.71         113.54        3642919        4242696           0.00        2263.79    49173646.60          11.59
		  &mapping->i_mmap_mutex:        203896         203899           3.36      645530.05 31767507988.39      155800.21        3361776        8893984           0.17        2254.15    14110121.02           1.59
			       &rq->lock:        135014         136909           0.18         606.09      842160.68           6.15        1540728       10436146           0.00         728.72    17606683.41           1.69
	       &(&zone->lru_lock)->rlock:         93000          94934           0.16          59.18      188253.78           1.98        1199912        3809894           0.15         391.40     3559518.81           0.93
			 tasklist_lock-W:         40667          41130           0.23        1189.42      428980.51          10.43         270278         510106           0.16         653.51     3939674.91           7.72
			 tasklist_lock-R:         21298          21305           0.20        1310.05      215511.12          10.12         186204         241258           0.14        1162.33     1179779.23           4.89
			      rcu_node_1:         47656          49022           0.16         635.41      193616.41           3.95         844888        1865423           0.00         764.26     1656226.96           0.89
       &(&dentry->d_lockref.lock)->rlock:         39791          40179           0.15        1302.08       88851.96           2.21        2790851       12527025           0.10        1910.75     3379714.27           0.27
			      rcu_node_0:         29203          30064           0.16         786.55     1555573.00          51.74          88963         244254           0.00         398.87      428872.51           1.76

Clear the statistics::

  # echo 0 > /proc/lock_stat
==================================
Kernel Lock Torture Test Operation
==================================

CONFIG_LOCK_TORTURE_TEST
========================

The CONFIG_LOCK_TORTURE_TEST config option provides a kernel module
that runs torture tests on core kernel locking primitives. The kernel
module, 'locktorture', may be built after the fact on the running
kernel to be tested, if desired. The tests periodically output status
messages via printk(), which can be examined via the dmesg (perhaps
grepping for "torture").  The test is started when the module is loaded,
and stops when the module is unloaded. This program is based on how RCU
is tortured, via rcutorture.

This torture test consists of creating a number of kernel threads which
acquire the lock and hold it for specific amount of time, thus simulating
different critical region behaviors. The amount of contention on the lock
can be simulated by either enlarging this critical region hold time and/or
creating more kthreads.


Module Parameters
=================

This module has the following parameters:


Locktorture-specific
--------------------

nwriters_stress
		  Number of kernel threads that will stress exclusive lock
		  ownership (writers). The default value is twice the number
		  of online CPUs.

nreaders_stress
		  Number of kernel threads that will stress shared lock
		  ownership (readers). The default is the same amount of writer
		  locks. If the user did not specify nwriters_stress, then
		  both readers and writers be the amount of online CPUs.

torture_type
		  Type of lock to torture. By default, only spinlocks will
		  be tortured. This module can torture the following locks,
		  with string values as follows:

		     - "lock_busted":
				Simulates a buggy lock implementation.

		     - "spin_lock":
				spin_lock() and spin_unlock() pairs.

		     - "spin_lock_irq":
				spin_lock_irq() and spin_unlock_irq() pairs.

		     - "rw_lock":
				read/write lock() and unlock() rwlock pairs.

		     - "rw_lock_irq":
				read/write lock_irq() and unlock_irq()
				rwlock pairs.

		     - "mutex_lock":
				mutex_lock() and mutex_unlock() pairs.

		     - "rtmutex_lock":
				rtmutex_lock() and rtmutex_unlock() pairs.
				Kernel must have CONFIG_RT_MUTEXES=y.

		     - "rwsem_lock":
				read/write down() and up() semaphore pairs.


Torture-framework (RCU + locking)
---------------------------------

shutdown_secs
		  The number of seconds to run the test before terminating
		  the test and powering off the system.  The default is
		  zero, which disables test termination and system shutdown.
		  This capability is useful for automated testing.

onoff_interval
		  The number of seconds between each attempt to execute a
		  randomly selected CPU-hotplug operation.  Defaults
		  to zero, which disables CPU hotplugging.  In
		  CONFIG_HOTPLUG_CPU=n kernels, locktorture will silently
		  refuse to do any CPU-hotplug operations regardless of
		  what value is specified for onoff_interval.

onoff_holdoff
		  The number of seconds to wait until starting CPU-hotplug
		  operations.  This would normally only be used when
		  locktorture was built into the kernel and started
		  automatically at boot time, in which case it is useful
		  in order to avoid confusing boot-time code with CPUs
		  coming and going. This parameter is only useful if
		  CONFIG_HOTPLUG_CPU is enabled.

stat_interval
		  Number of seconds between statistics-related printk()s.
		  By default, locktorture will report stats every 60 seconds.
		  Setting the interval to zero causes the statistics to
		  be printed -only- when the module is unloaded.

stutter
		  The length of time to run the test before pausing for this
		  same period of time.  Defaults to "stutter=5", so as
		  to run and pause for (roughly) five-second intervals.
		  Specifying "stutter=0" causes the test to run continuously
		  without pausing.

shuffle_interval
		  The number of seconds to keep the test threads affinitized
		  to a particular subset of the CPUs, defaults to 3 seconds.
		  Used in conjunction with test_no_idle_hz.

verbose
		  Enable verbose debugging printing, via printk(). Enabled
		  by default. This extra information is mostly related to
		  high-level errors and reports from the main 'torture'
		  framework.


Statistics
==========

Statistics are printed in the following format::

  spin_lock-torture: Writes:  Total: 93746064  Max/Min: 0/0   Fail: 0
     (A)		    (B)		   (C)		  (D)	       (E)

  (A): Lock type that is being tortured -- torture_type parameter.

  (B): Number of writer lock acquisitions. If dealing with a read/write
       primitive a second "Reads" statistics line is printed.

  (C): Number of times the lock was acquired.

  (D): Min and max number of times threads failed to acquire the lock.

  (E): true/false values if there were errors acquiring the lock. This should
       -only- be positive if there is a bug in the locking primitive's
       implementation. Otherwise a lock should never fail (i.e., spin_lock()).
       Of course, the same applies for (C), above. A dummy example of this is
       the "lock_busted" type.

Usage
=====

The following script may be used to torture locks::

	#!/bin/sh

	modprobe locktorture
	sleep 3600
	rmmod locktorture
	dmesg | grep torture:

The output can be manually inspected for the error flag of "!!!".
One could of course create a more elaborate script that automatically
checked for such errors.  The "rmmod" command forces a "SUCCESS",
"FAILURE", or "RCU_HOTPLUG" indication to be printk()ed.  The first
two are self-explanatory, while the last indicates that while there
were no locking failures, CPU-hotplug problems were detected.

Also see: Documentation/RCU/torture.rst
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

.. _kernel_hacking_locktypes:

==========================
Lock types and their rules
==========================

Introduction
============

The kernel provides a variety of locking primitives which can be divided
into three categories:

 - Sleeping locks
 - CPU local locks
 - Spinning locks

This document conceptually describes these lock types and provides rules
for their nesting, including the rules for use under PREEMPT_RT.


Lock categories
===============

Sleeping locks
--------------

Sleeping locks can only be acquired in preemptible task context.

Although implementations allow try_lock() from other contexts, it is
necessary to carefully evaluate the safety of unlock() as well as of
try_lock().  Furthermore, it is also necessary to evaluate the debugging
versions of these primitives.  In short, don't acquire sleeping locks from
other contexts unless there is no other option.

Sleeping lock types:

 - mutex
 - rt_mutex
 - semaphore
 - rw_semaphore
 - ww_mutex
 - percpu_rw_semaphore

On PREEMPT_RT kernels, these lock types are converted to sleeping locks:

 - local_lock
 - spinlock_t
 - rwlock_t


CPU local locks
---------------

 - local_lock

On non-PREEMPT_RT kernels, local_lock functions are wrappers around
preemption and interrupt disabling primitives. Contrary to other locking
mechanisms, disabling preemption or interrupts are pure CPU local
concurrency control mechanisms and not suited for inter-CPU concurrency
control.


Spinning locks
--------------

 - raw_spinlock_t
 - bit spinlocks

On non-PREEMPT_RT kernels, these lock types are also spinning locks:

 - spinlock_t
 - rwlock_t

Spinning locks implicitly disable preemption and the lock / unlock functions
can have suffixes which apply further protections:

 ===================  ====================================================
 _bh()                Disable / enable bottom halves (soft interrupts)
 _irq()               Disable / enable interrupts
 _irqsave/restore()   Save and disable / restore interrupt disabled state
 ===================  ====================================================


Owner semantics
===============

The aforementioned lock types except semaphores have strict owner
semantics:

  The context (task) that acquired the lock must release it.

rw_semaphores have a special interface which allows non-owner release for
readers.


rtmutex
=======

RT-mutexes are mutexes with support for priority inheritance (PI).

PI has limitations on non-PREEMPT_RT kernels due to preemption and
interrupt disabled sections.

PI clearly cannot preempt preemption-disabled or interrupt-disabled
regions of code, even on PREEMPT_RT kernels.  Instead, PREEMPT_RT kernels
execute most such regions of code in preemptible task context, especially
interrupt handlers and soft interrupts.  This conversion allows spinlock_t
and rwlock_t to be implemented via RT-mutexes.


semaphore
=========

semaphore is a counting semaphore implementation.

Semaphores are often used for both serialization and waiting, but new use
cases should instead use separate serialization and wait mechanisms, such
as mutexes and completions.

semaphores and PREEMPT_RT
----------------------------

PREEMPT_RT does not change the semaphore implementation because counting
semaphores have no concept of owners, thus preventing PREEMPT_RT from
providing priority inheritance for semaphores.  After all, an unknown
owner cannot be boosted. As a consequence, blocking on semaphores can
result in priority inversion.


rw_semaphore
============

rw_semaphore is a multiple readers and single writer lock mechanism.

On non-PREEMPT_RT kernels the implementation is fair, thus preventing
writer starvation.

rw_semaphore complies by default with the strict owner semantics, but there
exist special-purpose interfaces that allow non-owner release for readers.
These interfaces work independent of the kernel configuration.

rw_semaphore and PREEMPT_RT
---------------------------

PREEMPT_RT kernels map rw_semaphore to a separate rt_mutex-based
implementation, thus changing the fairness:

 Because an rw_semaphore writer cannot grant its priority to multiple
 readers, a preempted low-priority reader will continue holding its lock,
 thus starving even high-priority writers.  In contrast, because readers
 can grant their priority to a writer, a preempted low-priority writer will
 have its priority boosted until it releases the lock, thus preventing that
 writer from starving readers.


local_lock
==========

local_lock provides a named scope to critical sections which are protected
by disabling preemption or interrupts.

On non-PREEMPT_RT kernels local_lock operations map to the preemption and
interrupt disabling and enabling primitives:

 ===============================  ======================
 local_lock(&llock)               preempt_disable()
 local_unlock(&llock)             preempt_enable()
 local_lock_irq(&llock)           local_irq_disable()
 local_unlock_irq(&llock)         local_irq_enable()
 local_lock_irqsave(&llock)       local_irq_save()
 local_unlock_irqrestore(&llock)  local_irq_restore()
 ===============================  ======================

The named scope of local_lock has two advantages over the regular
primitives:

  - The lock name allows static analysis and is also a clear documentation
    of the protection scope while the regular primitives are scopeless and
    opaque.

  - If lockdep is enabled the local_lock gains a lockmap which allows to
    validate the correctness of the protection. This can detect cases where
    e.g. a function using preempt_disable() as protection mechanism is
    invoked from interrupt or soft-interrupt context. Aside of that
    lockdep_assert_held(&llock) works as with any other locking primitive.

local_lock and PREEMPT_RT
-------------------------

PREEMPT_RT kernels map local_lock to a per-CPU spinlock_t, thus changing
semantics:

  - All spinlock_t changes also apply to local_lock.

local_lock usage
----------------

local_lock should be used in situations where disabling preemption or
interrupts is the appropriate form of concurrency control to protect
per-CPU data structures on a non PREEMPT_RT kernel.

local_lock is not suitable to protect against preemption or interrupts on a
PREEMPT_RT kernel due to the PREEMPT_RT specific spinlock_t semantics.


raw_spinlock_t and spinlock_t
=============================

raw_spinlock_t
--------------

raw_spinlock_t is a strict spinning lock implementation in all kernels,
including PREEMPT_RT kernels.  Use raw_spinlock_t only in real critical
core code, low-level interrupt handling and places where disabling
preemption or interrupts is required, for example, to safely access
hardware state.  raw_spinlock_t can sometimes also be used when the
critical section is tiny, thus avoiding RT-mutex overhead.

spinlock_t
----------

The semantics of spinlock_t change with the state of PREEMPT_RT.

On a non-PREEMPT_RT kernel spinlock_t is mapped to raw_spinlock_t and has
exactly the same semantics.

spinlock_t and PREEMPT_RT
-------------------------

On a PREEMPT_RT kernel spinlock_t is mapped to a separate implementation
based on rt_mutex which changes the semantics:

 - Preemption is not disabled.

 - The hard interrupt related suffixes for spin_lock / spin_unlock
   operations (_irq, _irqsave / _irqrestore) do not affect the CPU's
   interrupt disabled state.

 - The soft interrupt related suffix (_bh()) still disables softirq
   handlers.

   Non-PREEMPT_RT kernels disable preemption to get this effect.

   PREEMPT_RT kernels use a per-CPU lock for serialization which keeps
   preemption enabled. The lock disables softirq handlers and also
   prevents reentrancy due to task preemption.

PREEMPT_RT kernels preserve all other spinlock_t semantics:

 - Tasks holding a spinlock_t do not migrate.  Non-PREEMPT_RT kernels
   avoid migration by disabling preemption.  PREEMPT_RT kernels instead
   disable migration, which ensures that pointers to per-CPU variables
   remain valid even if the task is preempted.

 - Task state is preserved across spinlock acquisition, ensuring that the
   task-state rules apply to all kernel configurations.  Non-PREEMPT_RT
   kernels leave task state untouched.  However, PREEMPT_RT must change
   task state if the task blocks during acquisition.  Therefore, it saves
   the current task state before blocking and the corresponding lock wakeup
   restores it, as shown below::

    task->state = TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE
     lock()
       block()
         task->saved_state = task->state
	 task->state = TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE
	 schedule()
					lock wakeup
					  task->state = task->saved_state

   Other types of wakeups would normally unconditionally set the task state
   to RUNNING, but that does not work here because the task must remain
   blocked until the lock becomes available.  Therefore, when a non-lock
   wakeup attempts to awaken a task blocked waiting for a spinlock, it
   instead sets the saved state to RUNNING.  Then, when the lock
   acquisition completes, the lock wakeup sets the task state to the saved
   state, in this case setting it to RUNNING::

    task->state = TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE
     lock()
       block()
         task->saved_state = task->state
	 task->state = TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE
	 schedule()
					non lock wakeup
					  task->saved_state = TASK_RUNNING

					lock wakeup
					  task->state = task->saved_state

   This ensures that the real wakeup cannot be lost.


rwlock_t
========

rwlock_t is a multiple readers and single writer lock mechanism.

Non-PREEMPT_RT kernels implement rwlock_t as a spinning lock and the
suffix rules of spinlock_t apply accordingly. The implementation is fair,
thus preventing writer starvation.

rwlock_t and PREEMPT_RT
-----------------------

PREEMPT_RT kernels map rwlock_t to a separate rt_mutex-based
implementation, thus changing semantics:

 - All the spinlock_t changes also apply to rwlock_t.

 - Because an rwlock_t writer cannot grant its priority to multiple
   readers, a preempted low-priority reader will continue holding its lock,
   thus starving even high-priority writers.  In contrast, because readers
   can grant their priority to a writer, a preempted low-priority writer
   will have its priority boosted until it releases the lock, thus
   preventing that writer from starving readers.


PREEMPT_RT caveats
==================

local_lock on RT
----------------

The mapping of local_lock to spinlock_t on PREEMPT_RT kernels has a few
implications. For example, on a non-PREEMPT_RT kernel the following code
sequence works as expected::

  local_lock_irq(&local_lock);
  raw_spin_lock(&lock);

and is fully equivalent to::

   raw_spin_lock_irq(&lock);

On a PREEMPT_RT kernel this code sequence breaks because local_lock_irq()
is mapped to a per-CPU spinlock_t which neither disables interrupts nor
preemption. The following code sequence works perfectly correct on both
PREEMPT_RT and non-PREEMPT_RT kernels::

  local_lock_irq(&local_lock);
  spin_lock(&lock);

Another caveat with local locks is that each local_lock has a specific
protection scope. So the following substitution is wrong::

  func1()
  {
    local_irq_save(flags);    -> local_lock_irqsave(&local_lock_1, flags);
    func3();
    local_irq_restore(flags); -> local_unlock_irqrestore(&local_lock_1, flags);
  }

  func2()
  {
    local_irq_save(flags);    -> local_lock_irqsave(&local_lock_2, flags);
    func3();
    local_irq_restore(flags); -> local_unlock_irqrestore(&local_lock_2, flags);
  }

  func3()
  {
    lockdep_assert_irqs_disabled();
    access_protected_data();
  }

On a non-PREEMPT_RT kernel this works correctly, but on a PREEMPT_RT kernel
local_lock_1 and local_lock_2 are distinct and cannot serialize the callers
of func3(). Also the lockdep assert will trigger on a PREEMPT_RT kernel
because local_lock_irqsave() does not disable interrupts due to the
PREEMPT_RT-specific semantics of spinlock_t. The correct substitution is::

  func1()
  {
    local_irq_save(flags);    -> local_lock_irqsave(&local_lock, flags);
    func3();
    local_irq_restore(flags); -> local_unlock_irqrestore(&local_lock, flags);
  }

  func2()
  {
    local_irq_save(flags);    -> local_lock_irqsave(&local_lock, flags);
    func3();
    local_irq_restore(flags); -> local_unlock_irqrestore(&local_lock, flags);
  }

  func3()
  {
    lockdep_assert_held(&local_lock);
    access_protected_data();
  }


spinlock_t and rwlock_t
-----------------------

The changes in spinlock_t and rwlock_t semantics on PREEMPT_RT kernels
have a few implications.  For example, on a non-PREEMPT_RT kernel the
following code sequence works as expected::

   local_irq_disable();
   spin_lock(&lock);

and is fully equivalent to::

   spin_lock_irq(&lock);

Same applies to rwlock_t and the _irqsave() suffix variants.

On PREEMPT_RT kernel this code sequence breaks because RT-mutex requires a
fully preemptible context.  Instead, use spin_lock_irq() or
spin_lock_irqsave() and their unlock counterparts.  In cases where the
interrupt disabling and locking must remain separate, PREEMPT_RT offers a
local_lock mechanism.  Acquiring the local_lock pins the task to a CPU,
allowing things like per-CPU interrupt disabled locks to be acquired.
However, this approach should be used only where absolutely necessary.

A typical scenario is protection of per-CPU variables in thread context::

  struct foo *p = get_cpu_ptr(&var1);

  spin_lock(&p->lock);
  p->count += this_cpu_read(var2);

This is correct code on a non-PREEMPT_RT kernel, but on a PREEMPT_RT kernel
this breaks. The PREEMPT_RT-specific change of spinlock_t semantics does
not allow to acquire p->lock because get_cpu_ptr() implicitly disables
preemption. The following substitution works on both kernels::

  struct foo *p;

  migrate_disable();
  p = this_cpu_ptr(&var1);
  spin_lock(&p->lock);
  p->count += this_cpu_read(var2);

migrate_disable() ensures that the task is pinned on the current CPU which
in turn guarantees that the per-CPU access to var1 and var2 are staying on
the same CPU while the task remains preemptible.

The migrate_disable() substitution is not valid for the following
scenario::

  func()
  {
    struct foo *p;

    migrate_disable();
    p = this_cpu_ptr(&var1);
    p->val = func2();

This breaks because migrate_disable() does not protect against reentrancy from
a preempting task. A correct substitution for this case is::

  func()
  {
    struct foo *p;

    local_lock(&foo_lock);
    p = this_cpu_ptr(&var1);
    p->val = func2();

On a non-PREEMPT_RT kernel this protects against reentrancy by disabling
preemption. On a PREEMPT_RT kernel this is achieved by acquiring the
underlying per-CPU spinlock.


raw_spinlock_t on RT
--------------------

Acquiring a raw_spinlock_t disables preemption and possibly also
interrupts, so the critical section must avoid acquiring a regular
spinlock_t or rwlock_t, for example, the critical section must avoid
allocating memory.  Thus, on a non-PREEMPT_RT kernel the following code
works perfectly::

  raw_spin_lock(&lock);
  p = kmalloc(sizeof(*p), GFP_ATOMIC);

But this code fails on PREEMPT_RT kernels because the memory allocator is
fully preemptible and therefore cannot be invoked from truly atomic
contexts.  However, it is perfectly fine to invoke the memory allocator
while holding normal non-raw spinlocks because they do not disable
preemption on PREEMPT_RT kernels::

  spin_lock(&lock);
  p = kmalloc(sizeof(*p), GFP_ATOMIC);


bit spinlocks
-------------

PREEMPT_RT cannot substitute bit spinlocks because a single bit is too
small to accommodate an RT-mutex.  Therefore, the semantics of bit
spinlocks are preserved on PREEMPT_RT kernels, so that the raw_spinlock_t
caveats also apply to bit spinlocks.

Some bit spinlocks are replaced with regular spinlock_t for PREEMPT_RT
using conditional (#ifdef'ed) code changes at the usage site.  In contrast,
usage-site changes are not needed for the spinlock_t substitution.
Instead, conditionals in header files and the core locking implementation
enable the compiler to do the substitution transparently.


Lock type nesting rules
=======================

The most basic rules are:

  - Lock types of the same lock category (sleeping, CPU local, spinning)
    can nest arbitrarily as long as they respect the general lock ordering
    rules to prevent deadlocks.

  - Sleeping lock types cannot nest inside CPU local and spinning lock types.

  - CPU local and spinning lock types can nest inside sleeping lock types.

  - Spinning lock types can nest inside all lock types

These constraints apply both in PREEMPT_RT and otherwise.

The fact that PREEMPT_RT changes the lock category of spinlock_t and
rwlock_t from spinning to sleeping and substitutes local_lock with a
per-CPU spinlock_t means that they cannot be acquired while holding a raw
spinlock.  This results in the following nesting ordering:

  1) Sleeping locks
  2) spinlock_t, rwlock_t, local_lock
  3) raw_spinlock_t and bit spinlocks

Lockdep will complain if these constraints are violated, both in
PREEMPT_RT and otherwise.
=======================
Generic Mutex Subsystem
=======================

started by Ingo Molnar <mingo@redhat.com>

updated by Davidlohr Bueso <davidlohr@hp.com>

What are mutexes?
-----------------

In the Linux kernel, mutexes refer to a particular locking primitive
that enforces serialization on shared memory systems, and not only to
the generic term referring to 'mutual exclusion' found in academia
or similar theoretical text books. Mutexes are sleeping locks which
behave similarly to binary semaphores, and were introduced in 2006[1]
as an alternative to these. This new data structure provided a number
of advantages, including simpler interfaces, and at that time smaller
code (see Disadvantages).

[1] https://lwn.net/Articles/164802/

Implementation
--------------

Mutexes are represented by 'struct mutex', defined in include/linux/mutex.h
and implemented in kernel/locking/mutex.c. These locks use an atomic variable
(->owner) to keep track of the lock state during its lifetime.  Field owner
actually contains `struct task_struct *` to the current lock owner and it is
therefore NULL if not currently owned. Since task_struct pointers are aligned
to at least L1_CACHE_BYTES, low bits (3) are used to store extra state (e.g.,
if waiter list is non-empty).  In its most basic form it also includes a
wait-queue and a spinlock that serializes access to it. Furthermore,
CONFIG_MUTEX_SPIN_ON_OWNER=y systems use a spinner MCS lock (->osq), described
below in (ii).

When acquiring a mutex, there are three possible paths that can be
taken, depending on the state of the lock:

(i) fastpath: tries to atomically acquire the lock by cmpxchg()ing the owner with
    the current task. This only works in the uncontended case (cmpxchg() checks
    against 0UL, so all 3 state bits above have to be 0). If the lock is
    contended it goes to the next possible path.

(ii) midpath: aka optimistic spinning, tries to spin for acquisition
     while the lock owner is running and there are no other tasks ready
     to run that have higher priority (need_resched). The rationale is
     that if the lock owner is running, it is likely to release the lock
     soon. The mutex spinners are queued up using MCS lock so that only
     one spinner can compete for the mutex.

     The MCS lock (proposed by Mellor-Crummey and Scott) is a simple spinlock
     with the desirable properties of being fair and with each cpu trying
     to acquire the lock spinning on a local variable. It avoids expensive
     cacheline bouncing that common test-and-set spinlock implementations
     incur. An MCS-like lock is specially tailored for optimistic spinning
     for sleeping lock implementation. An important feature of the customized
     MCS lock is that it has the extra property that spinners are able to exit
     the MCS spinlock queue when they need to reschedule. This further helps
     avoid situations where MCS spinners that need to reschedule would continue
     waiting to spin on mutex owner, only to go directly to slowpath upon
     obtaining the MCS lock.


(iii) slowpath: last resort, if the lock is still unable to be acquired,
      the task is added to the wait-queue and sleeps until woken up by the
      unlock path. Under normal circumstances it blocks as TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE.

While formally kernel mutexes are sleepable locks, it is path (ii) that
makes them more practically a hybrid type. By simply not interrupting a
task and busy-waiting for a few cycles instead of immediately sleeping,
the performance of this lock has been seen to significantly improve a
number of workloads. Note that this technique is also used for rw-semaphores.

Semantics
---------

The mutex subsystem checks and enforces the following rules:

    - Only one task can hold the mutex at a time.
    - Only the owner can unlock the mutex.
    - Multiple unlocks are not permitted.
    - Recursive locking/unlocking is not permitted.
    - A mutex must only be initialized via the API (see below).
    - A task may not exit with a mutex held.
    - Memory areas where held locks reside must not be freed.
    - Held mutexes must not be reinitialized.
    - Mutexes may not be used in hardware or software interrupt
      contexts such as tasklets and timers.

These semantics are fully enforced when CONFIG DEBUG_MUTEXES is enabled.
In addition, the mutex debugging code also implements a number of other
features that make lock debugging easier and faster:

    - Uses symbolic names of mutexes, whenever they are printed
      in debug output.
    - Point-of-acquire tracking, symbolic lookup of function names,
      list of all locks held in the system, printout of them.
    - Owner tracking.
    - Detects self-recursing locks and prints out all relevant info.
    - Detects multi-task circular deadlocks and prints out all affected
      locks and tasks (and only those tasks).

Mutexes - and most other sleeping locks like rwsems - do not provide an
implicit reference for the memory they occupy, which reference is released
with mutex_unlock().

[ This is in contrast with spin_unlock() [or completion_done()], which
  APIs can be used to guarantee that the memory is not touched by the
  lock implementation after spin_unlock()/completion_done() releases
  the lock. ]

mutex_unlock() may access the mutex structure even after it has internally
released the lock already - so it's not safe for another context to
acquire the mutex and assume that the mutex_unlock() context is not using
the structure anymore.

The mutex user must ensure that the mutex is not destroyed while a
release operation is still in progress - in other words, callers of
mutex_unlock() must ensure that the mutex stays alive until mutex_unlock()
has returned.

Interfaces
----------
Statically define the mutex::

   DEFINE_MUTEX(name);

Dynamically initialize the mutex::

   mutex_init(mutex);

Acquire the mutex, uninterruptible::

   void mutex_lock(struct mutex *lock);
   void mutex_lock_nested(struct mutex *lock, unsigned int subclass);
   int  mutex_trylock(struct mutex *lock);

Acquire the mutex, interruptible::

   int mutex_lock_interruptible_nested(struct mutex *lock,
				       unsigned int subclass);
   int mutex_lock_interruptible(struct mutex *lock);

Acquire the mutex, interruptible, if dec to 0::

   int atomic_dec_and_mutex_lock(atomic_t *cnt, struct mutex *lock);

Unlock the mutex::

   void mutex_unlock(struct mutex *lock);

Test if the mutex is taken::

   int mutex_is_locked(struct mutex *lock);

Disadvantages
-------------

Unlike its original design and purpose, 'struct mutex' is among the largest
locks in the kernel. E.g: on x86-64 it is 32 bytes, where 'struct semaphore'
is 24 bytes and rw_semaphore is 40 bytes. Larger structure sizes mean more CPU
cache and memory footprint.

When to use mutexes
-------------------

Unless the strict semantics of mutexes are unsuitable and/or the critical
region prevents the lock from being shared, always prefer them to any other
locking primitive.
====================
Percpu rw semaphores
====================

Percpu rw semaphores is a new read-write semaphore design that is
optimized for locking for reading.

The problem with traditional read-write semaphores is that when multiple
cores take the lock for reading, the cache line containing the semaphore
is bouncing between L1 caches of the cores, causing performance
degradation.

Locking for reading is very fast, it uses RCU and it avoids any atomic
instruction in the lock and unlock path. On the other hand, locking for
writing is very expensive, it calls synchronize_rcu() that can take
hundreds of milliseconds.

The lock is declared with "struct percpu_rw_semaphore" type.
The lock is initialized percpu_init_rwsem, it returns 0 on success and
-ENOMEM on allocation failure.
The lock must be freed with percpu_free_rwsem to avoid memory leak.

The lock is locked for read with percpu_down_read, percpu_up_read and
for write with percpu_down_write, percpu_up_write.

The idea of using RCU for optimized rw-lock was introduced by
Eric Dumazet <eric.dumazet@gmail.com>.
The code was written by Mikulas Patocka <mpatocka@redhat.com>
======================
Lightweight PI-futexes
======================

We are calling them lightweight for 3 reasons:

 - in the user-space fastpath a PI-enabled futex involves no kernel work
   (or any other PI complexity) at all. No registration, no extra kernel
   calls - just pure fast atomic ops in userspace.

 - even in the slowpath, the system call and scheduling pattern is very
   similar to normal futexes.

 - the in-kernel PI implementation is streamlined around the mutex
   abstraction, with strict rules that keep the implementation
   relatively simple: only a single owner may own a lock (i.e. no
   read-write lock support), only the owner may unlock a lock, no
   recursive locking, etc.

Priority Inheritance - why?
---------------------------

The short reply: user-space PI helps achieving/improving determinism for
user-space applications. In the best-case, it can help achieve
determinism and well-bound latencies. Even in the worst-case, PI will
improve the statistical distribution of locking related application
delays.

The longer reply
----------------

Firstly, sharing locks between multiple tasks is a common programming
technique that often cannot be replaced with lockless algorithms. As we
can see it in the kernel [which is a quite complex program in itself],
lockless structures are rather the exception than the norm - the current
ratio of lockless vs. locky code for shared data structures is somewhere
between 1:10 and 1:100. Lockless is hard, and the complexity of lockless
algorithms often endangers to ability to do robust reviews of said code.
I.e. critical RT apps often choose lock structures to protect critical
data structures, instead of lockless algorithms. Furthermore, there are
cases (like shared hardware, or other resource limits) where lockless
access is mathematically impossible.

Media players (such as Jack) are an example of reasonable application
design with multiple tasks (with multiple priority levels) sharing
short-held locks: for example, a highprio audio playback thread is
combined with medium-prio construct-audio-data threads and low-prio
display-colory-stuff threads. Add video and decoding to the mix and
we've got even more priority levels.

So once we accept that synchronization objects (locks) are an
unavoidable fact of life, and once we accept that multi-task userspace
apps have a very fair expectation of being able to use locks, we've got
to think about how to offer the option of a deterministic locking
implementation to user-space.

Most of the technical counter-arguments against doing priority
inheritance only apply to kernel-space locks. But user-space locks are
different, there we cannot disable interrupts or make the task
non-preemptible in a critical section, so the 'use spinlocks' argument
does not apply (user-space spinlocks have the same priority inversion
problems as other user-space locking constructs). Fact is, pretty much
the only technique that currently enables good determinism for userspace
locks (such as futex-based pthread mutexes) is priority inheritance:

Currently (without PI), if a high-prio and a low-prio task shares a lock
[this is a quite common scenario for most non-trivial RT applications],
even if all critical sections are coded carefully to be deterministic
(i.e. all critical sections are short in duration and only execute a
limited number of instructions), the kernel cannot guarantee any
deterministic execution of the high-prio task: any medium-priority task
could preempt the low-prio task while it holds the shared lock and
executes the critical section, and could delay it indefinitely.

Implementation
--------------

As mentioned before, the userspace fastpath of PI-enabled pthread
mutexes involves no kernel work at all - they behave quite similarly to
normal futex-based locks: a 0 value means unlocked, and a value==TID
means locked. (This is the same method as used by list-based robust
futexes.) Userspace uses atomic ops to lock/unlock these mutexes without
entering the kernel.

To handle the slowpath, we have added two new futex ops:

  - FUTEX_LOCK_PI
  - FUTEX_UNLOCK_PI

If the lock-acquire fastpath fails, [i.e. an atomic transition from 0 to
TID fails], then FUTEX_LOCK_PI is called. The kernel does all the
remaining work: if there is no futex-queue attached to the futex address
yet then the code looks up the task that owns the futex [it has put its
own TID into the futex value], and attaches a 'PI state' structure to
the futex-queue. The pi_state includes an rt-mutex, which is a PI-aware,
kernel-based synchronization object. The 'other' task is made the owner
of the rt-mutex, and the FUTEX_WAITERS bit is atomically set in the
futex value. Then this task tries to lock the rt-mutex, on which it
blocks. Once it returns, it has the mutex acquired, and it sets the
futex value to its own TID and returns. Userspace has no other work to
perform - it now owns the lock, and futex value contains
FUTEX_WAITERS|TID.

If the unlock side fastpath succeeds, [i.e. userspace manages to do a
TID -> 0 atomic transition of the futex value], then no kernel work is
triggered.

If the unlock fastpath fails (because the FUTEX_WAITERS bit is set),
then FUTEX_UNLOCK_PI is called, and the kernel unlocks the futex on the
behalf of userspace - and it also unlocks the attached
pi_state->rt_mutex and thus wakes up any potential waiters.

Note that under this approach, contrary to previous PI-futex approaches,
there is no prior 'registration' of a PI-futex. [which is not quite
possible anyway, due to existing ABI properties of pthread mutexes.]

Also, under this scheme, 'robustness' and 'PI' are two orthogonal
properties of futexes, and all four combinations are possible: futex,
robust-futex, PI-futex, robust+PI-futex.

More details about priority inheritance can be found in
Documentation/locking/rt-mutex.rst.
===========================================================================
Proper Locking Under a Preemptible Kernel: Keeping Kernel Code Preempt-Safe
===========================================================================

:Author: Robert Love <rml@tech9.net>


Introduction
============


A preemptible kernel creates new locking issues.  The issues are the same as
those under SMP: concurrency and reentrancy.  Thankfully, the Linux preemptible
kernel model leverages existing SMP locking mechanisms.  Thus, the kernel
requires explicit additional locking for very few additional situations.

This document is for all kernel hackers.  Developing code in the kernel
requires protecting these situations.
 

RULE #1: Per-CPU data structures need explicit protection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


Two similar problems arise. An example code snippet::

	struct this_needs_locking tux[NR_CPUS];
	tux[smp_processor_id()] = some_value;
	/* task is preempted here... */
	something = tux[smp_processor_id()];

First, since the data is per-CPU, it may not have explicit SMP locking, but
require it otherwise.  Second, when a preempted task is finally rescheduled,
the previous value of smp_processor_id may not equal the current.  You must
protect these situations by disabling preemption around them.

You can also use put_cpu() and get_cpu(), which will disable preemption.


RULE #2: CPU state must be protected.
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


Under preemption, the state of the CPU must be protected.  This is arch-
dependent, but includes CPU structures and state not preserved over a context
switch.  For example, on x86, entering and exiting FPU mode is now a critical
section that must occur while preemption is disabled.  Think what would happen
if the kernel is executing a floating-point instruction and is then preempted.
Remember, the kernel does not save FPU state except for user tasks.  Therefore,
upon preemption, the FPU registers will be sold to the lowest bidder.  Thus,
preemption must be disabled around such regions.

Note, some FPU functions are already explicitly preempt safe.  For example,
kernel_fpu_begin and kernel_fpu_end will disable and enable preemption.


RULE #3: Lock acquire and release must be performed by same task
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


A lock acquired in one task must be released by the same task.  This
means you can't do oddball things like acquire a lock and go off to
play while another task releases it.  If you want to do something
like this, acquire and release the task in the same code path and
have the caller wait on an event by the other task.


Solution
========


Data protection under preemption is achieved by disabling preemption for the
duration of the critical region.

::

  preempt_enable()		decrement the preempt counter
  preempt_disable()		increment the preempt counter
  preempt_enable_no_resched()	decrement, but do not immediately preempt
  preempt_check_resched()	if needed, reschedule
  preempt_count()		return the preempt counter

The functions are nestable.  In other words, you can call preempt_disable
n-times in a code path, and preemption will not be reenabled until the n-th
call to preempt_enable.  The preempt statements define to nothing if
preemption is not enabled.

Note that you do not need to explicitly prevent preemption if you are holding
any locks or interrupts are disabled, since preemption is implicitly disabled
in those cases.

But keep in mind that 'irqs disabled' is a fundamentally unsafe way of
disabling preemption - any cond_resched() or cond_resched_lock() might trigger
a reschedule if the preempt count is 0. A simple printk() might trigger a
reschedule. So use this implicit preemption-disabling property only if you
know that the affected codepath does not do any of this. Best policy is to use
this only for small, atomic code that you wrote and which calls no complex
functions.

Example::

	cpucache_t *cc; /* this is per-CPU */
	preempt_disable();
	cc = cc_data(searchp);
	if (cc && cc->avail) {
		__free_block(searchp, cc_entry(cc), cc->avail);
		cc->avail = 0;
	}
	preempt_enable();
	return 0;

Notice how the preemption statements must encompass every reference of the
critical variables.  Another example::

	int buf[NR_CPUS];
	set_cpu_val(buf);
	if (buf[smp_processor_id()] == -1) printf(KERN_INFO "wee!\n");
	spin_lock(&buf_lock);
	/* ... */

This code is not preempt-safe, but see how easily we can fix it by simply
moving the spin_lock up two lines.


Preventing preemption using interrupt disabling
===============================================


It is possible to prevent a preemption event using local_irq_disable and
local_irq_save.  Note, when doing so, you must be very careful to not cause
an event that would set need_resched and result in a preemption check.  When
in doubt, rely on locking or explicit preemption disabling.

Note in 2.5 interrupt disabling is now only per-CPU (e.g. local).

An additional concern is proper usage of local_irq_disable and local_irq_save.
These may be used to protect from preemption, however, on exit, if preemption
may be enabled, a test to see if preemption is required should be done.  If
these are called from the spin_lock and read/write lock macros, the right thing
is done.  They may also be called within a spin-lock protected region, however,
if they are ever called outside of this context, a test for preemption should
be made. Do note that calls from interrupt context or bottom half/ tasklets
are also protected by preemption locks and so may use the versions which do
not check preemption.
====================
The robust futex ABI
====================

:Author: Started by Paul Jackson <pj@sgi.com>


Robust_futexes provide a mechanism that is used in addition to normal
futexes, for kernel assist of cleanup of held locks on task exit.

The interesting data as to what futexes a thread is holding is kept on a
linked list in user space, where it can be updated efficiently as locks
are taken and dropped, without kernel intervention.  The only additional
kernel intervention required for robust_futexes above and beyond what is
required for futexes is:

 1) a one time call, per thread, to tell the kernel where its list of
    held robust_futexes begins, and
 2) internal kernel code at exit, to handle any listed locks held
    by the exiting thread.

The existing normal futexes already provide a "Fast Userspace Locking"
mechanism, which handles uncontested locking without needing a system
call, and handles contested locking by maintaining a list of waiting
threads in the kernel.  Options on the sys_futex(2) system call support
waiting on a particular futex, and waking up the next waiter on a
particular futex.

For robust_futexes to work, the user code (typically in a library such
as glibc linked with the application) has to manage and place the
necessary list elements exactly as the kernel expects them.  If it fails
to do so, then improperly listed locks will not be cleaned up on exit,
probably causing deadlock or other such failure of the other threads
waiting on the same locks.

A thread that anticipates possibly using robust_futexes should first
issue the system call::

    asmlinkage long
    sys_set_robust_list(struct robust_list_head __user *head, size_t len);

The pointer 'head' points to a structure in the threads address space
consisting of three words.  Each word is 32 bits on 32 bit arch's, or 64
bits on 64 bit arch's, and local byte order.  Each thread should have
its own thread private 'head'.

If a thread is running in 32 bit compatibility mode on a 64 native arch
kernel, then it can actually have two such structures - one using 32 bit
words for 32 bit compatibility mode, and one using 64 bit words for 64
bit native mode.  The kernel, if it is a 64 bit kernel supporting 32 bit
compatibility mode, will attempt to process both lists on each task
exit, if the corresponding sys_set_robust_list() call has been made to
setup that list.

  The first word in the memory structure at 'head' contains a
  pointer to a single linked list of 'lock entries', one per lock,
  as described below.  If the list is empty, the pointer will point
  to itself, 'head'.  The last 'lock entry' points back to the 'head'.

  The second word, called 'offset', specifies the offset from the
  address of the associated 'lock entry', plus or minus, of what will
  be called the 'lock word', from that 'lock entry'.  The 'lock word'
  is always a 32 bit word, unlike the other words above.  The 'lock
  word' holds 2 flag bits in the upper 2 bits, and the thread id (TID)
  of the thread holding the lock in the bottom 30 bits.  See further
  below for a description of the flag bits.

  The third word, called 'list_op_pending', contains transient copy of
  the address of the 'lock entry', during list insertion and removal,
  and is needed to correctly resolve races should a thread exit while
  in the middle of a locking or unlocking operation.

Each 'lock entry' on the single linked list starting at 'head' consists
of just a single word, pointing to the next 'lock entry', or back to
'head' if there are no more entries.  In addition, nearby to each 'lock
entry', at an offset from the 'lock entry' specified by the 'offset'
word, is one 'lock word'.

The 'lock word' is always 32 bits, and is intended to be the same 32 bit
lock variable used by the futex mechanism, in conjunction with
robust_futexes.  The kernel will only be able to wakeup the next thread
waiting for a lock on a threads exit if that next thread used the futex
mechanism to register the address of that 'lock word' with the kernel.

For each futex lock currently held by a thread, if it wants this
robust_futex support for exit cleanup of that lock, it should have one
'lock entry' on this list, with its associated 'lock word' at the
specified 'offset'.  Should a thread die while holding any such locks,
the kernel will walk this list, mark any such locks with a bit
indicating their holder died, and wakeup the next thread waiting for
that lock using the futex mechanism.

When a thread has invoked the above system call to indicate it
anticipates using robust_futexes, the kernel stores the passed in 'head'
pointer for that task.  The task may retrieve that value later on by
using the system call::

    asmlinkage long
    sys_get_robust_list(int pid, struct robust_list_head __user **head_ptr,
                        size_t __user *len_ptr);

It is anticipated that threads will use robust_futexes embedded in
larger, user level locking structures, one per lock.  The kernel
robust_futex mechanism doesn't care what else is in that structure, so
long as the 'offset' to the 'lock word' is the same for all
robust_futexes used by that thread.  The thread should link those locks
it currently holds using the 'lock entry' pointers.  It may also have
other links between the locks, such as the reverse side of a double
linked list, but that doesn't matter to the kernel.

By keeping its locks linked this way, on a list starting with a 'head'
pointer known to the kernel, the kernel can provide to a thread the
essential service available for robust_futexes, which is to help clean
up locks held at the time of (a perhaps unexpectedly) exit.

Actual locking and unlocking, during normal operations, is handled
entirely by user level code in the contending threads, and by the
existing futex mechanism to wait for, and wakeup, locks.  The kernels
only essential involvement in robust_futexes is to remember where the
list 'head' is, and to walk the list on thread exit, handling locks
still held by the departing thread, as described below.

There may exist thousands of futex lock structures in a threads shared
memory, on various data structures, at a given point in time. Only those
lock structures for locks currently held by that thread should be on
that thread's robust_futex linked lock list a given time.

A given futex lock structure in a user shared memory region may be held
at different times by any of the threads with access to that region. The
thread currently holding such a lock, if any, is marked with the threads
TID in the lower 30 bits of the 'lock word'.

When adding or removing a lock from its list of held locks, in order for
the kernel to correctly handle lock cleanup regardless of when the task
exits (perhaps it gets an unexpected signal 9 in the middle of
manipulating this list), the user code must observe the following
protocol on 'lock entry' insertion and removal:

On insertion:

 1) set the 'list_op_pending' word to the address of the 'lock entry'
    to be inserted,
 2) acquire the futex lock,
 3) add the lock entry, with its thread id (TID) in the bottom 30 bits
    of the 'lock word', to the linked list starting at 'head', and
 4) clear the 'list_op_pending' word.

On removal:

 1) set the 'list_op_pending' word to the address of the 'lock entry'
    to be removed,
 2) remove the lock entry for this lock from the 'head' list,
 3) release the futex lock, and
 4) clear the 'lock_op_pending' word.

On exit, the kernel will consider the address stored in
'list_op_pending' and the address of each 'lock word' found by walking
the list starting at 'head'.  For each such address, if the bottom 30
bits of the 'lock word' at offset 'offset' from that address equals the
exiting threads TID, then the kernel will do two things:

 1) if bit 31 (0x80000000) is set in that word, then attempt a futex
    wakeup on that address, which will waken the next thread that has
    used to the futex mechanism to wait on that address, and
 2) atomically set  bit 30 (0x40000000) in the 'lock word'.

In the above, bit 31 was set by futex waiters on that lock to indicate
they were waiting, and bit 30 is set by the kernel to indicate that the
lock owner died holding the lock.

The kernel exit code will silently stop scanning the list further if at
any point:

 1) the 'head' pointer or an subsequent linked list pointer
    is not a valid address of a user space word
 2) the calculated location of the 'lock word' (address plus
    'offset') is not the valid address of a 32 bit user space
    word
 3) if the list contains more than 1 million (subject to
    future kernel configuration changes) elements.

When the kernel sees a list entry whose 'lock word' doesn't have the
current threads TID in the lower 30 bits, it does nothing with that
entry, and goes on to the next entry.
========================================
A description of what robust futexes are
========================================

:Started by: Ingo Molnar <mingo@redhat.com>

Background
----------

what are robust futexes? To answer that, we first need to understand
what futexes are: normal futexes are special types of locks that in the
noncontended case can be acquired/released from userspace without having
to enter the kernel.

A futex is in essence a user-space address, e.g. a 32-bit lock variable
field. If userspace notices contention (the lock is already owned and
someone else wants to grab it too) then the lock is marked with a value
that says "there's a waiter pending", and the sys_futex(FUTEX_WAIT)
syscall is used to wait for the other guy to release it. The kernel
creates a 'futex queue' internally, so that it can later on match up the
waiter with the waker - without them having to know about each other.
When the owner thread releases the futex, it notices (via the variable
value) that there were waiter(s) pending, and does the
sys_futex(FUTEX_WAKE) syscall to wake them up.  Once all waiters have
taken and released the lock, the futex is again back to 'uncontended'
state, and there's no in-kernel state associated with it. The kernel
completely forgets that there ever was a futex at that address. This
method makes futexes very lightweight and scalable.

"Robustness" is about dealing with crashes while holding a lock: if a
process exits prematurely while holding a pthread_mutex_t lock that is
also shared with some other process (e.g. yum segfaults while holding a
pthread_mutex_t, or yum is kill -9-ed), then waiters for that lock need
to be notified that the last owner of the lock exited in some irregular
way.

To solve such types of problems, "robust mutex" userspace APIs were
created: pthread_mutex_lock() returns an error value if the owner exits
prematurely - and the new owner can decide whether the data protected by
the lock can be recovered safely.

There is a big conceptual problem with futex based mutexes though: it is
the kernel that destroys the owner task (e.g. due to a SEGFAULT), but
the kernel cannot help with the cleanup: if there is no 'futex queue'
(and in most cases there is none, futexes being fast lightweight locks)
then the kernel has no information to clean up after the held lock!
Userspace has no chance to clean up after the lock either - userspace is
the one that crashes, so it has no opportunity to clean up. Catch-22.

In practice, when e.g. yum is kill -9-ed (or segfaults), a system reboot
is needed to release that futex based lock. This is one of the leading
bugreports against yum.

To solve this problem, the traditional approach was to extend the vma
(virtual memory area descriptor) concept to have a notion of 'pending
robust futexes attached to this area'. This approach requires 3 new
syscall variants to sys_futex(): FUTEX_REGISTER, FUTEX_DEREGISTER and
FUTEX_RECOVER. At do_exit() time, all vmas are searched to see whether
they have a robust_head set. This approach has two fundamental problems
left:

 - it has quite complex locking and race scenarios. The vma-based
   approach had been pending for years, but they are still not completely
   reliable.

 - they have to scan _every_ vma at sys_exit() time, per thread!

The second disadvantage is a real killer: pthread_exit() takes around 1
microsecond on Linux, but with thousands (or tens of thousands) of vmas
every pthread_exit() takes a millisecond or more, also totally
destroying the CPU's L1 and L2 caches!

This is very much noticeable even for normal process sys_exit_group()
calls: the kernel has to do the vma scanning unconditionally! (this is
because the kernel has no knowledge about how many robust futexes there
are to be cleaned up, because a robust futex might have been registered
in another task, and the futex variable might have been simply mmap()-ed
into this process's address space).

This huge overhead forced the creation of CONFIG_FUTEX_ROBUST so that
normal kernels can turn it off, but worse than that: the overhead makes
robust futexes impractical for any type of generic Linux distribution.

So something had to be done.

New approach to robust futexes
------------------------------

At the heart of this new approach there is a per-thread private list of
robust locks that userspace is holding (maintained by glibc) - which
userspace list is registered with the kernel via a new syscall [this
registration happens at most once per thread lifetime]. At do_exit()
time, the kernel checks this user-space list: are there any robust futex
locks to be cleaned up?

In the common case, at do_exit() time, there is no list registered, so
the cost of robust futexes is just a simple current->robust_list != NULL
comparison. If the thread has registered a list, then normally the list
is empty. If the thread/process crashed or terminated in some incorrect
way then the list might be non-empty: in this case the kernel carefully
walks the list [not trusting it], and marks all locks that are owned by
this thread with the FUTEX_OWNER_DIED bit, and wakes up one waiter (if
any).

The list is guaranteed to be private and per-thread at do_exit() time,
so it can be accessed by the kernel in a lockless way.

There is one race possible though: since adding to and removing from the
list is done after the futex is acquired by glibc, there is a few
instructions window for the thread (or process) to die there, leaving
the futex hung. To protect against this possibility, userspace (glibc)
also maintains a simple per-thread 'list_op_pending' field, to allow the
kernel to clean up if the thread dies after acquiring the lock, but just
before it could have added itself to the list. Glibc sets this
list_op_pending field before it tries to acquire the futex, and clears
it after the list-add (or list-remove) has finished.

That's all that is needed - all the rest of robust-futex cleanup is done
in userspace [just like with the previous patches].

Ulrich Drepper has implemented the necessary glibc support for this new
mechanism, which fully enables robust mutexes.

Key differences of this userspace-list based approach, compared to the
vma based method:

 - it's much, much faster: at thread exit time, there's no need to loop
   over every vma (!), which the VM-based method has to do. Only a very
   simple 'is the list empty' op is done.

 - no VM changes are needed - 'struct address_space' is left alone.

 - no registration of individual locks is needed: robust mutexes don't
   need any extra per-lock syscalls. Robust mutexes thus become a very
   lightweight primitive - so they don't force the application designer
   to do a hard choice between performance and robustness - robust
   mutexes are just as fast.

 - no per-lock kernel allocation happens.

 - no resource limits are needed.

 - no kernel-space recovery call (FUTEX_RECOVER) is needed.

 - the implementation and the locking is "obvious", and there are no
   interactions with the VM.

Performance
-----------

I have benchmarked the time needed for the kernel to process a list of 1
million (!) held locks, using the new method [on a 2GHz CPU]:

 - with FUTEX_WAIT set [contended mutex]: 130 msecs
 - without FUTEX_WAIT set [uncontended mutex]: 30 msecs

I have also measured an approach where glibc does the lock notification
[which it currently does for !pshared robust mutexes], and that took 256
msecs - clearly slower, due to the 1 million FUTEX_WAKE syscalls
userspace had to do.

(1 million held locks are unheard of - we expect at most a handful of
locks to be held at a time. Nevertheless it's nice to know that this
approach scales nicely.)

Implementation details
----------------------

The patch adds two new syscalls: one to register the userspace list, and
one to query the registered list pointer::

 asmlinkage long
 sys_set_robust_list(struct robust_list_head __user *head,
                     size_t len);

 asmlinkage long
 sys_get_robust_list(int pid, struct robust_list_head __user **head_ptr,
                     size_t __user *len_ptr);

List registration is very fast: the pointer is simply stored in
current->robust_list. [Note that in the future, if robust futexes become
widespread, we could extend sys_clone() to register a robust-list head
for new threads, without the need of another syscall.]

So there is virtually zero overhead for tasks not using robust futexes,
and even for robust futex users, there is only one extra syscall per
thread lifetime, and the cleanup operation, if it happens, is fast and
straightforward. The kernel doesn't have any internal distinction between
robust and normal futexes.

If a futex is found to be held at exit time, the kernel sets the
following bit of the futex word::

	#define FUTEX_OWNER_DIED        0x40000000

and wakes up the next futex waiter (if any). User-space does the rest of
the cleanup.

Otherwise, robust futexes are acquired by glibc by putting the TID into
the futex field atomically. Waiters set the FUTEX_WAITERS bit::

	#define FUTEX_WAITERS           0x80000000

and the remaining bits are for the TID.

Testing, architecture support
-----------------------------

I've tested the new syscalls on x86 and x86_64, and have made sure the
parsing of the userspace list is robust [ ;-) ] even if the list is
deliberately corrupted.

i386 and x86_64 syscalls are wired up at the moment, and Ulrich has
tested the new glibc code (on x86_64 and i386), and it works for his
robust-mutex testcases.

All other architectures should build just fine too - but they won't have
the new syscalls yet.

Architectures need to implement the new futex_atomic_cmpxchg_inatomic()
inline function before writing up the syscalls.
==============================
RT-mutex implementation design
==============================

Copyright (c) 2006 Steven Rostedt

Licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2


This document tries to describe the design of the rtmutex.c implementation.
It doesn't describe the reasons why rtmutex.c exists. For that please see
Documentation/locking/rt-mutex.rst.  Although this document does explain problems
that happen without this code, but that is in the concept to understand
what the code actually is doing.

The goal of this document is to help others understand the priority
inheritance (PI) algorithm that is used, as well as reasons for the
decisions that were made to implement PI in the manner that was done.


Unbounded Priority Inversion
----------------------------

Priority inversion is when a lower priority process executes while a higher
priority process wants to run.  This happens for several reasons, and
most of the time it can't be helped.  Anytime a high priority process wants
to use a resource that a lower priority process has (a mutex for example),
the high priority process must wait until the lower priority process is done
with the resource.  This is a priority inversion.  What we want to prevent
is something called unbounded priority inversion.  That is when the high
priority process is prevented from running by a lower priority process for
an undetermined amount of time.

The classic example of unbounded priority inversion is where you have three
processes, let's call them processes A, B, and C, where A is the highest
priority process, C is the lowest, and B is in between. A tries to grab a lock
that C owns and must wait and lets C run to release the lock. But in the
meantime, B executes, and since B is of a higher priority than C, it preempts C,
but by doing so, it is in fact preempting A which is a higher priority process.
Now there's no way of knowing how long A will be sleeping waiting for C
to release the lock, because for all we know, B is a CPU hog and will
never give C a chance to release the lock.  This is called unbounded priority
inversion.

Here's a little ASCII art to show the problem::

     grab lock L1 (owned by C)
       |
  A ---+
          C preempted by B
            |
  C    +----+

  B         +-------->
                  B now keeps A from running.


Priority Inheritance (PI)
-------------------------

There are several ways to solve this issue, but other ways are out of scope
for this document.  Here we only discuss PI.

PI is where a process inherits the priority of another process if the other
process blocks on a lock owned by the current process.  To make this easier
to understand, let's use the previous example, with processes A, B, and C again.

This time, when A blocks on the lock owned by C, C would inherit the priority
of A.  So now if B becomes runnable, it would not preempt C, since C now has
the high priority of A.  As soon as C releases the lock, it loses its
inherited priority, and A then can continue with the resource that C had.

Terminology
-----------

Here I explain some terminology that is used in this document to help describe
the design that is used to implement PI.

PI chain
         - The PI chain is an ordered series of locks and processes that cause
           processes to inherit priorities from a previous process that is
           blocked on one of its locks.  This is described in more detail
           later in this document.

mutex
         - In this document, to differentiate from locks that implement
           PI and spin locks that are used in the PI code, from now on
           the PI locks will be called a mutex.

lock
         - In this document from now on, I will use the term lock when
           referring to spin locks that are used to protect parts of the PI
           algorithm.  These locks disable preemption for UP (when
           CONFIG_PREEMPT is enabled) and on SMP prevents multiple CPUs from
           entering critical sections simultaneously.

spin lock
         - Same as lock above.

waiter
         - A waiter is a struct that is stored on the stack of a blocked
           process.  Since the scope of the waiter is within the code for
           a process being blocked on the mutex, it is fine to allocate
           the waiter on the process's stack (local variable).  This
           structure holds a pointer to the task, as well as the mutex that
           the task is blocked on.  It also has rbtree node structures to
           place the task in the waiters rbtree of a mutex as well as the
           pi_waiters rbtree of a mutex owner task (described below).

           waiter is sometimes used in reference to the task that is waiting
           on a mutex. This is the same as waiter->task.

waiters
         - A list of processes that are blocked on a mutex.

top waiter
         - The highest priority process waiting on a specific mutex.

top pi waiter
              - The highest priority process waiting on one of the mutexes
                that a specific process owns.

Note:
       task and process are used interchangeably in this document, mostly to
       differentiate between two processes that are being described together.


PI chain
--------

The PI chain is a list of processes and mutexes that may cause priority
inheritance to take place.  Multiple chains may converge, but a chain
would never diverge, since a process can't be blocked on more than one
mutex at a time.

Example::

   Process:  A, B, C, D, E
   Mutexes:  L1, L2, L3, L4

   A owns: L1
           B blocked on L1
           B owns L2
                  C blocked on L2
                  C owns L3
                         D blocked on L3
                         D owns L4
                                E blocked on L4

The chain would be::

   E->L4->D->L3->C->L2->B->L1->A

To show where two chains merge, we could add another process F and
another mutex L5 where B owns L5 and F is blocked on mutex L5.

The chain for F would be::

   F->L5->B->L1->A

Since a process may own more than one mutex, but never be blocked on more than
one, the chains merge.

Here we show both chains::

   E->L4->D->L3->C->L2-+
                       |
                       +->B->L1->A
                       |
                 F->L5-+

For PI to work, the processes at the right end of these chains (or we may
also call it the Top of the chain) must be equal to or higher in priority
than the processes to the left or below in the chain.

Also since a mutex may have more than one process blocked on it, we can
have multiple chains merge at mutexes.  If we add another process G that is
blocked on mutex L2::

  G->L2->B->L1->A

And once again, to show how this can grow I will show the merging chains
again::

   E->L4->D->L3->C-+
                   +->L2-+
                   |     |
                 G-+     +->B->L1->A
                         |
                   F->L5-+

If process G has the highest priority in the chain, then all the tasks up
the chain (A and B in this example), must have their priorities increased
to that of G.

Mutex Waiters Tree
------------------

Every mutex keeps track of all the waiters that are blocked on itself. The
mutex has a rbtree to store these waiters by priority.  This tree is protected
by a spin lock that is located in the struct of the mutex. This lock is called
wait_lock.


Task PI Tree
------------

To keep track of the PI chains, each process has its own PI rbtree.  This is
a tree of all top waiters of the mutexes that are owned by the process.
Note that this tree only holds the top waiters and not all waiters that are
blocked on mutexes owned by the process.

The top of the task's PI tree is always the highest priority task that
is waiting on a mutex that is owned by the task.  So if the task has
inherited a priority, it will always be the priority of the task that is
at the top of this tree.

This tree is stored in the task structure of a process as a rbtree called
pi_waiters.  It is protected by a spin lock also in the task structure,
called pi_lock.  This lock may also be taken in interrupt context, so when
locking the pi_lock, interrupts must be disabled.


Depth of the PI Chain
---------------------

The maximum depth of the PI chain is not dynamic, and could actually be
defined.  But is very complex to figure it out, since it depends on all
the nesting of mutexes.  Let's look at the example where we have 3 mutexes,
L1, L2, and L3, and four separate functions func1, func2, func3 and func4.
The following shows a locking order of L1->L2->L3, but may not actually
be directly nested that way::

  void func1(void)
  {
	mutex_lock(L1);

	/* do anything */

	mutex_unlock(L1);
  }

  void func2(void)
  {
	mutex_lock(L1);
	mutex_lock(L2);

	/* do something */

	mutex_unlock(L2);
	mutex_unlock(L1);
  }

  void func3(void)
  {
	mutex_lock(L2);
	mutex_lock(L3);

	/* do something else */

	mutex_unlock(L3);
	mutex_unlock(L2);
  }

  void func4(void)
  {
	mutex_lock(L3);

	/* do something again */

	mutex_unlock(L3);
  }

Now we add 4 processes that run each of these functions separately.
Processes A, B, C, and D which run functions func1, func2, func3 and func4
respectively, and such that D runs first and A last.  With D being preempted
in func4 in the "do something again" area, we have a locking that follows::

  D owns L3
         C blocked on L3
         C owns L2
                B blocked on L2
                B owns L1
                       A blocked on L1

  And thus we have the chain A->L1->B->L2->C->L3->D.

This gives us a PI depth of 4 (four processes), but looking at any of the
functions individually, it seems as though they only have at most a locking
depth of two.  So, although the locking depth is defined at compile time,
it still is very difficult to find the possibilities of that depth.

Now since mutexes can be defined by user-land applications, we don't want a DOS
type of application that nests large amounts of mutexes to create a large
PI chain, and have the code holding spin locks while looking at a large
amount of data.  So to prevent this, the implementation not only implements
a maximum lock depth, but also only holds at most two different locks at a
time, as it walks the PI chain.  More about this below.


Mutex owner and flags
---------------------

The mutex structure contains a pointer to the owner of the mutex.  If the
mutex is not owned, this owner is set to NULL.  Since all architectures
have the task structure on at least a two byte alignment (and if this is
not true, the rtmutex.c code will be broken!), this allows for the least
significant bit to be used as a flag.  Bit 0 is used as the "Has Waiters"
flag. It's set whenever there are waiters on a mutex.

See Documentation/locking/rt-mutex.rst for further details.

cmpxchg Tricks
--------------

Some architectures implement an atomic cmpxchg (Compare and Exchange).  This
is used (when applicable) to keep the fast path of grabbing and releasing
mutexes short.

cmpxchg is basically the following function performed atomically::

  unsigned long _cmpxchg(unsigned long *A, unsigned long *B, unsigned long *C)
  {
	unsigned long T = *A;
	if (*A == *B) {
		*A = *C;
	}
	return T;
  }
  #define cmpxchg(a,b,c) _cmpxchg(&a,&b,&c)

This is really nice to have, since it allows you to only update a variable
if the variable is what you expect it to be.  You know if it succeeded if
the return value (the old value of A) is equal to B.

The macro rt_mutex_cmpxchg is used to try to lock and unlock mutexes. If
the architecture does not support CMPXCHG, then this macro is simply set
to fail every time.  But if CMPXCHG is supported, then this will
help out extremely to keep the fast path short.

The use of rt_mutex_cmpxchg with the flags in the owner field help optimize
the system for architectures that support it.  This will also be explained
later in this document.


Priority adjustments
--------------------

The implementation of the PI code in rtmutex.c has several places that a
process must adjust its priority.  With the help of the pi_waiters of a
process this is rather easy to know what needs to be adjusted.

The functions implementing the task adjustments are rt_mutex_adjust_prio
and rt_mutex_setprio. rt_mutex_setprio is only used in rt_mutex_adjust_prio.

rt_mutex_adjust_prio examines the priority of the task, and the highest
priority process that is waiting any of mutexes owned by the task. Since
the pi_waiters of a task holds an order by priority of all the top waiters
of all the mutexes that the task owns, we simply need to compare the top
pi waiter to its own normal/deadline priority and take the higher one.
Then rt_mutex_setprio is called to adjust the priority of the task to the
new priority. Note that rt_mutex_setprio is defined in kernel/sched/core.c
to implement the actual change in priority.

Note:
	For the "prio" field in task_struct, the lower the number, the
	higher the priority. A "prio" of 5 is of higher priority than a
	"prio" of 10.

It is interesting to note that rt_mutex_adjust_prio can either increase
or decrease the priority of the task.  In the case that a higher priority
process has just blocked on a mutex owned by the task, rt_mutex_adjust_prio
would increase/boost the task's priority.  But if a higher priority task
were for some reason to leave the mutex (timeout or signal), this same function
would decrease/unboost the priority of the task.  That is because the pi_waiters
always contains the highest priority task that is waiting on a mutex owned
by the task, so we only need to compare the priority of that top pi waiter
to the normal priority of the given task.


High level overview of the PI chain walk
----------------------------------------

The PI chain walk is implemented by the function rt_mutex_adjust_prio_chain.

The implementation has gone through several iterations, and has ended up
with what we believe is the best.  It walks the PI chain by only grabbing
at most two locks at a time, and is very efficient.

The rt_mutex_adjust_prio_chain can be used either to boost or lower process
priorities.

rt_mutex_adjust_prio_chain is called with a task to be checked for PI
(de)boosting (the owner of a mutex that a process is blocking on), a flag to
check for deadlocking, the mutex that the task owns, a pointer to a waiter
that is the process's waiter struct that is blocked on the mutex (although this
parameter may be NULL for deboosting), a pointer to the mutex on which the task
is blocked, and a top_task as the top waiter of the mutex.

For this explanation, I will not mention deadlock detection. This explanation
will try to stay at a high level.

When this function is called, there are no locks held.  That also means
that the state of the owner and lock can change when entered into this function.

Before this function is called, the task has already had rt_mutex_adjust_prio
performed on it.  This means that the task is set to the priority that it
should be at, but the rbtree nodes of the task's waiter have not been updated
with the new priorities, and this task may not be in the proper locations
in the pi_waiters and waiters trees that the task is blocked on. This function
solves all that.

The main operation of this function is summarized by Thomas Gleixner in
rtmutex.c. See the 'Chain walk basics and protection scope' comment for further
details.

Taking of a mutex (The walk through)
------------------------------------

OK, now let's take a look at the detailed walk through of what happens when
taking a mutex.

The first thing that is tried is the fast taking of the mutex.  This is
done when we have CMPXCHG enabled (otherwise the fast taking automatically
fails).  Only when the owner field of the mutex is NULL can the lock be
taken with the CMPXCHG and nothing else needs to be done.

If there is contention on the lock, we go about the slow path
(rt_mutex_slowlock).

The slow path function is where the task's waiter structure is created on
the stack.  This is because the waiter structure is only needed for the
scope of this function.  The waiter structure holds the nodes to store
the task on the waiters tree of the mutex, and if need be, the pi_waiters
tree of the owner.

The wait_lock of the mutex is taken since the slow path of unlocking the
mutex also takes this lock.

We then call try_to_take_rt_mutex.  This is where the architecture that
does not implement CMPXCHG would always grab the lock (if there's no
contention).

try_to_take_rt_mutex is used every time the task tries to grab a mutex in the
slow path.  The first thing that is done here is an atomic setting of
the "Has Waiters" flag of the mutex's owner field. By setting this flag
now, the current owner of the mutex being contended for can't release the mutex
without going into the slow unlock path, and it would then need to grab the
wait_lock, which this code currently holds. So setting the "Has Waiters" flag
forces the current owner to synchronize with this code.

The lock is taken if the following are true:

   1) The lock has no owner
   2) The current task is the highest priority against all other
      waiters of the lock

If the task succeeds to acquire the lock, then the task is set as the
owner of the lock, and if the lock still has waiters, the top_waiter
(highest priority task waiting on the lock) is added to this task's
pi_waiters tree.

If the lock is not taken by try_to_take_rt_mutex(), then the
task_blocks_on_rt_mutex() function is called. This will add the task to
the lock's waiter tree and propagate the pi chain of the lock as well
as the lock's owner's pi_waiters tree. This is described in the next
section.

Task blocks on mutex
--------------------

The accounting of a mutex and process is done with the waiter structure of
the process.  The "task" field is set to the process, and the "lock" field
to the mutex.  The rbtree node of waiter are initialized to the processes
current priority.

Since the wait_lock was taken at the entry of the slow lock, we can safely
add the waiter to the task waiter tree.  If the current process is the
highest priority process currently waiting on this mutex, then we remove the
previous top waiter process (if it exists) from the pi_waiters of the owner,
and add the current process to that tree.  Since the pi_waiter of the owner
has changed, we call rt_mutex_adjust_prio on the owner to see if the owner
should adjust its priority accordingly.

If the owner is also blocked on a lock, and had its pi_waiters changed
(or deadlock checking is on), we unlock the wait_lock of the mutex and go ahead
and run rt_mutex_adjust_prio_chain on the owner, as described earlier.

Now all locks are released, and if the current process is still blocked on a
mutex (waiter "task" field is not NULL), then we go to sleep (call schedule).

Waking up in the loop
---------------------

The task can then wake up for a couple of reasons:
  1) The previous lock owner released the lock, and the task now is top_waiter
  2) we received a signal or timeout

In both cases, the task will try again to acquire the lock. If it
does, then it will take itself off the waiters tree and set itself back
to the TASK_RUNNING state.

In first case, if the lock was acquired by another task before this task
could get the lock, then it will go back to sleep and wait to be woken again.

The second case is only applicable for tasks that are grabbing a mutex
that can wake up before getting the lock, either due to a signal or
a timeout (i.e. rt_mutex_timed_futex_lock()). When woken, it will try to
take the lock again, if it succeeds, then the task will return with the
lock held, otherwise it will return with -EINTR if the task was woken
by a signal, or -ETIMEDOUT if it timed out.


Unlocking the Mutex
-------------------

The unlocking of a mutex also has a fast path for those architectures with
CMPXCHG.  Since the taking of a mutex on contention always sets the
"Has Waiters" flag of the mutex's owner, we use this to know if we need to
take the slow path when unlocking the mutex.  If the mutex doesn't have any
waiters, the owner field of the mutex would equal the current process and
the mutex can be unlocked by just replacing the owner field with NULL.

If the owner field has the "Has Waiters" bit set (or CMPXCHG is not available),
the slow unlock path is taken.

The first thing done in the slow unlock path is to take the wait_lock of the
mutex.  This synchronizes the locking and unlocking of the mutex.

A check is made to see if the mutex has waiters or not.  On architectures that
do not have CMPXCHG, this is the location that the owner of the mutex will
determine if a waiter needs to be awoken or not.  On architectures that
do have CMPXCHG, that check is done in the fast path, but it is still needed
in the slow path too.  If a waiter of a mutex woke up because of a signal
or timeout between the time the owner failed the fast path CMPXCHG check and
the grabbing of the wait_lock, the mutex may not have any waiters, thus the
owner still needs to make this check. If there are no waiters then the mutex
owner field is set to NULL, the wait_lock is released and nothing more is
needed.

If there are waiters, then we need to wake one up.

On the wake up code, the pi_lock of the current owner is taken.  The top
waiter of the lock is found and removed from the waiters tree of the mutex
as well as the pi_waiters tree of the current owner. The "Has Waiters" bit is
marked to prevent lower priority tasks from stealing the lock.

Finally we unlock the pi_lock of the pending owner and wake it up.


Contact
-------

For updates on this document, please email Steven Rostedt <rostedt@goodmis.org>


Credits
-------

Author:  Steven Rostedt <rostedt@goodmis.org>

Updated: Alex Shi <alex.shi@linaro.org>	- 7/6/2017

Original Reviewers:
		     Ingo Molnar, Thomas Gleixner, Thomas Duetsch, and
		     Randy Dunlap

Update (7/6/2017) Reviewers: Steven Rostedt and Sebastian Siewior

Updates
-------

This document was originally written for 2.6.17-rc3-mm1
was updated on 4.12
==================================
RT-mutex subsystem with PI support
==================================

RT-mutexes with priority inheritance are used to support PI-futexes,
which enable pthread_mutex_t priority inheritance attributes
(PTHREAD_PRIO_INHERIT). [See Documentation/locking/pi-futex.rst for more details
about PI-futexes.]

This technology was developed in the -rt tree and streamlined for
pthread_mutex support.

Basic principles:
-----------------

RT-mutexes extend the semantics of simple mutexes by the priority
inheritance protocol.

A low priority owner of a rt-mutex inherits the priority of a higher
priority waiter until the rt-mutex is released. If the temporarily
boosted owner blocks on a rt-mutex itself it propagates the priority
boosting to the owner of the other rt_mutex it gets blocked on. The
priority boosting is immediately removed once the rt_mutex has been
unlocked.

This approach allows us to shorten the block of high-prio tasks on
mutexes which protect shared resources. Priority inheritance is not a
magic bullet for poorly designed applications, but it allows
well-designed applications to use userspace locks in critical parts of
an high priority thread, without losing determinism.

The enqueueing of the waiters into the rtmutex waiter tree is done in
priority order. For same priorities FIFO order is chosen. For each
rtmutex, only the top priority waiter is enqueued into the owner's
priority waiters tree. This tree too queues in priority order. Whenever
the top priority waiter of a task changes (for example it timed out or
got a signal), the priority of the owner task is readjusted. The
priority enqueueing is handled by "pi_waiters".

RT-mutexes are optimized for fastpath operations and have no internal
locking overhead when locking an uncontended mutex or unlocking a mutex
without waiters. The optimized fastpath operations require cmpxchg
support. [If that is not available then the rt-mutex internal spinlock
is used]

The state of the rt-mutex is tracked via the owner field of the rt-mutex
structure:

lock->owner holds the task_struct pointer of the owner. Bit 0 is used to
keep track of the "lock has waiters" state:

 ============ ======= ================================================
 owner        bit0    Notes
 ============ ======= ================================================
 NULL         0       lock is free (fast acquire possible)
 NULL         1       lock is free and has waiters and the top waiter
		      is going to take the lock [1]_
 taskpointer  0       lock is held (fast release possible)
 taskpointer  1       lock is held and has waiters [2]_
 ============ ======= ================================================

The fast atomic compare exchange based acquire and release is only
possible when bit 0 of lock->owner is 0.

.. [1] It also can be a transitional state when grabbing the lock
       with ->wait_lock is held. To prevent any fast path cmpxchg to the lock,
       we need to set the bit0 before looking at the lock, and the owner may
       be NULL in this small time, hence this can be a transitional state.

.. [2] There is a small time when bit 0 is set but there are no
       waiters. This can happen when grabbing the lock in the slow path.
       To prevent a cmpxchg of the owner releasing the lock, we need to
       set this bit before looking at the lock.

BTW, there is still technically a "Pending Owner", it's just not called
that anymore. The pending owner happens to be the top_waiter of a lock
that has no owner and has been woken up to grab the lock.
======================================
Sequence counters and sequential locks
======================================

Introduction
============

Sequence counters are a reader-writer consistency mechanism with
lockless readers (read-only retry loops), and no writer starvation. They
are used for data that's rarely written to (e.g. system time), where the
reader wants a consistent set of information and is willing to retry if
that information changes.

A data set is consistent when the sequence count at the beginning of the
read side critical section is even and the same sequence count value is
read again at the end of the critical section. The data in the set must
be copied out inside the read side critical section. If the sequence
count has changed between the start and the end of the critical section,
the reader must retry.

Writers increment the sequence count at the start and the end of their
critical section. After starting the critical section the sequence count
is odd and indicates to the readers that an update is in progress. At
the end of the write side critical section the sequence count becomes
even again which lets readers make progress.

A sequence counter write side critical section must never be preempted
or interrupted by read side sections. Otherwise the reader will spin for
the entire scheduler tick due to the odd sequence count value and the
interrupted writer. If that reader belongs to a real-time scheduling
class, it can spin forever and the kernel will livelock.

This mechanism cannot be used if the protected data contains pointers,
as the writer can invalidate a pointer that the reader is following.


.. _seqcount_t:

Sequence counters (``seqcount_t``)
==================================

This is the raw counting mechanism, which does not protect against
multiple writers.  Write side critical sections must thus be serialized
by an external lock.

If the write serialization primitive is not implicitly disabling
preemption, preemption must be explicitly disabled before entering the
write side section. If the read section can be invoked from hardirq or
softirq contexts, interrupts or bottom halves must also be respectively
disabled before entering the write section.

If it's desired to automatically handle the sequence counter
requirements of writer serialization and non-preemptibility, use
:ref:`seqlock_t` instead.

Initialization::

	/* dynamic */
	seqcount_t foo_seqcount;
	seqcount_init(&foo_seqcount);

	/* static */
	static seqcount_t foo_seqcount = SEQCNT_ZERO(foo_seqcount);

	/* C99 struct init */
	struct {
		.seq   = SEQCNT_ZERO(foo.seq),
	} foo;

Write path::

	/* Serialized context with disabled preemption */

	write_seqcount_begin(&foo_seqcount);

	/* ... [[write-side critical section]] ... */

	write_seqcount_end(&foo_seqcount);

Read path::

	do {
		seq = read_seqcount_begin(&foo_seqcount);

		/* ... [[read-side critical section]] ... */

	} while (read_seqcount_retry(&foo_seqcount, seq));


.. _seqcount_locktype_t:

Sequence counters with associated locks (``seqcount_LOCKNAME_t``)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

As discussed at :ref:`seqcount_t`, sequence count write side critical
sections must be serialized and non-preemptible. This variant of
sequence counters associate the lock used for writer serialization at
initialization time, which enables lockdep to validate that the write
side critical sections are properly serialized.

This lock association is a NOOP if lockdep is disabled and has neither
storage nor runtime overhead. If lockdep is enabled, the lock pointer is
stored in struct seqcount and lockdep's "lock is held" assertions are
injected at the beginning of the write side critical section to validate
that it is properly protected.

For lock types which do not implicitly disable preemption, preemption
protection is enforced in the write side function.

The following sequence counters with associated locks are defined:

  - ``seqcount_spinlock_t``
  - ``seqcount_raw_spinlock_t``
  - ``seqcount_rwlock_t``
  - ``seqcount_mutex_t``
  - ``seqcount_ww_mutex_t``

The sequence counter read and write APIs can take either a plain
seqcount_t or any of the seqcount_LOCKNAME_t variants above.

Initialization (replace "LOCKNAME" with one of the supported locks)::

	/* dynamic */
	seqcount_LOCKNAME_t foo_seqcount;
	seqcount_LOCKNAME_init(&foo_seqcount, &lock);

	/* static */
	static seqcount_LOCKNAME_t foo_seqcount =
		SEQCNT_LOCKNAME_ZERO(foo_seqcount, &lock);

	/* C99 struct init */
	struct {
		.seq   = SEQCNT_LOCKNAME_ZERO(foo.seq, &lock),
	} foo;

Write path: same as in :ref:`seqcount_t`, while running from a context
with the associated write serialization lock acquired.

Read path: same as in :ref:`seqcount_t`.


.. _seqcount_latch_t:

Latch sequence counters (``seqcount_latch_t``)
----------------------------------------------

Latch sequence counters are a multiversion concurrency control mechanism
where the embedded seqcount_t counter even/odd value is used to switch
between two copies of protected data. This allows the sequence counter
read path to safely interrupt its own write side critical section.

Use seqcount_latch_t when the write side sections cannot be protected
from interruption by readers. This is typically the case when the read
side can be invoked from NMI handlers.

Check `write_seqcount_latch()` for more information.


.. _seqlock_t:

Sequential locks (``seqlock_t``)
================================

This contains the :ref:`seqcount_t` mechanism earlier discussed, plus an
embedded spinlock for writer serialization and non-preemptibility.

If the read side section can be invoked from hardirq or softirq context,
use the write side function variants which disable interrupts or bottom
halves respectively.

Initialization::

	/* dynamic */
	seqlock_t foo_seqlock;
	seqlock_init(&foo_seqlock);

	/* static */
	static DEFINE_SEQLOCK(foo_seqlock);

	/* C99 struct init */
	struct {
		.seql   = __SEQLOCK_UNLOCKED(foo.seql)
	} foo;

Write path::

	write_seqlock(&foo_seqlock);

	/* ... [[write-side critical section]] ... */

	write_sequnlock(&foo_seqlock);

Read path, three categories:

1. Normal Sequence readers which never block a writer but they must
   retry if a writer is in progress by detecting change in the sequence
   number.  Writers do not wait for a sequence reader::

	do {
		seq = read_seqbegin(&foo_seqlock);

		/* ... [[read-side critical section]] ... */

	} while (read_seqretry(&foo_seqlock, seq));

2. Locking readers which will wait if a writer or another locking reader
   is in progress. A locking reader in progress will also block a writer
   from entering its critical section. This read lock is
   exclusive. Unlike rwlock_t, only one locking reader can acquire it::

	read_seqlock_excl(&foo_seqlock);

	/* ... [[read-side critical section]] ... */

	read_sequnlock_excl(&foo_seqlock);

3. Conditional lockless reader (as in 1), or locking reader (as in 2),
   according to a passed marker. This is used to avoid lockless readers
   starvation (too much retry loops) in case of a sharp spike in write
   activity. First, a lockless read is tried (even marker passed). If
   that trial fails (odd sequence counter is returned, which is used as
   the next iteration marker), the lockless read is transformed to a
   full locking read and no retry loop is necessary::

	/* marker; even initialization */
	int seq = 0;
	do {
		read_seqbegin_or_lock(&foo_seqlock, &seq);

		/* ... [[read-side critical section]] ... */

	} while (need_seqretry(&foo_seqlock, seq));
	done_seqretry(&foo_seqlock, seq);


API documentation
=================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/seqlock.h
===============
Locking lessons
===============

Lesson 1: Spin locks
====================

The most basic primitive for locking is spinlock::

  static DEFINE_SPINLOCK(xxx_lock);

	unsigned long flags;

	spin_lock_irqsave(&xxx_lock, flags);
	... critical section here ..
	spin_unlock_irqrestore(&xxx_lock, flags);

The above is always safe. It will disable interrupts _locally_, but the
spinlock itself will guarantee the global lock, so it will guarantee that
there is only one thread-of-control within the region(s) protected by that
lock. This works well even under UP also, so the code does _not_ need to
worry about UP vs SMP issues: the spinlocks work correctly under both.

   NOTE! Implications of spin_locks for memory are further described in:

     Documentation/memory-barriers.txt

       (5) ACQUIRE operations.

       (6) RELEASE operations.

The above is usually pretty simple (you usually need and want only one
spinlock for most things - using more than one spinlock can make things a
lot more complex and even slower and is usually worth it only for
sequences that you **know** need to be split up: avoid it at all cost if you
aren't sure).

This is really the only really hard part about spinlocks: once you start
using spinlocks they tend to expand to areas you might not have noticed
before, because you have to make sure the spinlocks correctly protect the
shared data structures **everywhere** they are used. The spinlocks are most
easily added to places that are completely independent of other code (for
example, internal driver data structures that nobody else ever touches).

   NOTE! The spin-lock is safe only when you **also** use the lock itself
   to do locking across CPU's, which implies that EVERYTHING that
   touches a shared variable has to agree about the spinlock they want
   to use.

----

Lesson 2: reader-writer spinlocks.
==================================

If your data accesses have a very natural pattern where you usually tend
to mostly read from the shared variables, the reader-writer locks
(rw_lock) versions of the spinlocks are sometimes useful. They allow multiple
readers to be in the same critical region at once, but if somebody wants
to change the variables it has to get an exclusive write lock.

   NOTE! reader-writer locks require more atomic memory operations than
   simple spinlocks.  Unless the reader critical section is long, you
   are better off just using spinlocks.

The routines look the same as above::

   rwlock_t xxx_lock = __RW_LOCK_UNLOCKED(xxx_lock);

	unsigned long flags;

	read_lock_irqsave(&xxx_lock, flags);
	.. critical section that only reads the info ...
	read_unlock_irqrestore(&xxx_lock, flags);

	write_lock_irqsave(&xxx_lock, flags);
	.. read and write exclusive access to the info ...
	write_unlock_irqrestore(&xxx_lock, flags);

The above kind of lock may be useful for complex data structures like
linked lists, especially searching for entries without changing the list
itself.  The read lock allows many concurrent readers.  Anything that
**changes** the list will have to get the write lock.

   NOTE! RCU is better for list traversal, but requires careful
   attention to design detail (see Documentation/RCU/listRCU.rst).

Also, you cannot "upgrade" a read-lock to a write-lock, so if you at _any_
time need to do any changes (even if you don't do it every time), you have
to get the write-lock at the very beginning.

   NOTE! We are working hard to remove reader-writer spinlocks in most
   cases, so please don't add a new one without consensus.  (Instead, see
   Documentation/RCU/rcu.rst for complete information.)

----

Lesson 3: spinlocks revisited.
==============================

The single spin-lock primitives above are by no means the only ones. They
are the most safe ones, and the ones that work under all circumstances,
but partly **because** they are safe they are also fairly slow. They are slower
than they'd need to be, because they do have to disable interrupts
(which is just a single instruction on a x86, but it's an expensive one -
and on other architectures it can be worse).

If you have a case where you have to protect a data structure across
several CPU's and you want to use spinlocks you can potentially use
cheaper versions of the spinlocks. IFF you know that the spinlocks are
never used in interrupt handlers, you can use the non-irq versions::

	spin_lock(&lock);
	...
	spin_unlock(&lock);

(and the equivalent read-write versions too, of course). The spinlock will
guarantee the same kind of exclusive access, and it will be much faster.
This is useful if you know that the data in question is only ever
manipulated from a "process context", ie no interrupts involved.

The reasons you mustn't use these versions if you have interrupts that
play with the spinlock is that you can get deadlocks::

	spin_lock(&lock);
	...
		<- interrupt comes in:
			spin_lock(&lock);

where an interrupt tries to lock an already locked variable. This is ok if
the other interrupt happens on another CPU, but it is _not_ ok if the
interrupt happens on the same CPU that already holds the lock, because the
lock will obviously never be released (because the interrupt is waiting
for the lock, and the lock-holder is interrupted by the interrupt and will
not continue until the interrupt has been processed).

(This is also the reason why the irq-versions of the spinlocks only need
to disable the _local_ interrupts - it's ok to use spinlocks in interrupts
on other CPU's, because an interrupt on another CPU doesn't interrupt the
CPU that holds the lock, so the lock-holder can continue and eventually
releases the lock).

		Linus

----

Reference information:
======================

For dynamic initialization, use spin_lock_init() or rwlock_init() as
appropriate::

   spinlock_t xxx_lock;
   rwlock_t xxx_rw_lock;

   static int __init xxx_init(void)
   {
	spin_lock_init(&xxx_lock);
	rwlock_init(&xxx_rw_lock);
	...
   }

   module_init(xxx_init);

For static initialization, use DEFINE_SPINLOCK() / DEFINE_RWLOCK() or
__SPIN_LOCK_UNLOCKED() / __RW_LOCK_UNLOCKED() as appropriate.
======================================
Wound/Wait Deadlock-Proof Mutex Design
======================================

Please read mutex-design.rst first, as it applies to wait/wound mutexes too.

Motivation for WW-Mutexes
-------------------------

GPU's do operations that commonly involve many buffers.  Those buffers
can be shared across contexts/processes, exist in different memory
domains (for example VRAM vs system memory), and so on.  And with
PRIME / dmabuf, they can even be shared across devices.  So there are
a handful of situations where the driver needs to wait for buffers to
become ready.  If you think about this in terms of waiting on a buffer
mutex for it to become available, this presents a problem because
there is no way to guarantee that buffers appear in a execbuf/batch in
the same order in all contexts.  That is directly under control of
userspace, and a result of the sequence of GL calls that an application
makes.	Which results in the potential for deadlock.  The problem gets
more complex when you consider that the kernel may need to migrate the
buffer(s) into VRAM before the GPU operates on the buffer(s), which
may in turn require evicting some other buffers (and you don't want to
evict other buffers which are already queued up to the GPU), but for a
simplified understanding of the problem you can ignore this.

The algorithm that the TTM graphics subsystem came up with for dealing with
this problem is quite simple.  For each group of buffers (execbuf) that need
to be locked, the caller would be assigned a unique reservation id/ticket,
from a global counter.  In case of deadlock while locking all the buffers
associated with a execbuf, the one with the lowest reservation ticket (i.e.
the oldest task) wins, and the one with the higher reservation id (i.e. the
younger task) unlocks all of the buffers that it has already locked, and then
tries again.

In the RDBMS literature, a reservation ticket is associated with a transaction.
and the deadlock handling approach is called Wait-Die. The name is based on
the actions of a locking thread when it encounters an already locked mutex.
If the transaction holding the lock is younger, the locking transaction waits.
If the transaction holding the lock is older, the locking transaction backs off
and dies. Hence Wait-Die.
There is also another algorithm called Wound-Wait:
If the transaction holding the lock is younger, the locking transaction
wounds the transaction holding the lock, requesting it to die.
If the transaction holding the lock is older, it waits for the other
transaction. Hence Wound-Wait.
The two algorithms are both fair in that a transaction will eventually succeed.
However, the Wound-Wait algorithm is typically stated to generate fewer backoffs
compared to Wait-Die, but is, on the other hand, associated with more work than
Wait-Die when recovering from a backoff. Wound-Wait is also a preemptive
algorithm in that transactions are wounded by other transactions, and that
requires a reliable way to pick up the wounded condition and preempt the
running transaction. Note that this is not the same as process preemption. A
Wound-Wait transaction is considered preempted when it dies (returning
-EDEADLK) following a wound.

Concepts
--------

Compared to normal mutexes two additional concepts/objects show up in the lock
interface for w/w mutexes:

Acquire context: To ensure eventual forward progress it is important that a task
trying to acquire locks doesn't grab a new reservation id, but keeps the one it
acquired when starting the lock acquisition. This ticket is stored in the
acquire context. Furthermore the acquire context keeps track of debugging state
to catch w/w mutex interface abuse. An acquire context is representing a
transaction.

W/w class: In contrast to normal mutexes the lock class needs to be explicit for
w/w mutexes, since it is required to initialize the acquire context. The lock
class also specifies what algorithm to use, Wound-Wait or Wait-Die.

Furthermore there are three different class of w/w lock acquire functions:

* Normal lock acquisition with a context, using ww_mutex_lock.

* Slowpath lock acquisition on the contending lock, used by the task that just
  killed its transaction after having dropped all already acquired locks.
  These functions have the _slow postfix.

  From a simple semantics point-of-view the _slow functions are not strictly
  required, since simply calling the normal ww_mutex_lock functions on the
  contending lock (after having dropped all other already acquired locks) will
  work correctly. After all if no other ww mutex has been acquired yet there's
  no deadlock potential and hence the ww_mutex_lock call will block and not
  prematurely return -EDEADLK. The advantage of the _slow functions is in
  interface safety:

  - ww_mutex_lock has a __must_check int return type, whereas ww_mutex_lock_slow
    has a void return type. Note that since ww mutex code needs loops/retries
    anyway the __must_check doesn't result in spurious warnings, even though the
    very first lock operation can never fail.
  - When full debugging is enabled ww_mutex_lock_slow checks that all acquired
    ww mutex have been released (preventing deadlocks) and makes sure that we
    block on the contending lock (preventing spinning through the -EDEADLK
    slowpath until the contended lock can be acquired).

* Functions to only acquire a single w/w mutex, which results in the exact same
  semantics as a normal mutex. This is done by calling ww_mutex_lock with a NULL
  context.

  Again this is not strictly required. But often you only want to acquire a
  single lock in which case it's pointless to set up an acquire context (and so
  better to avoid grabbing a deadlock avoidance ticket).

Of course, all the usual variants for handling wake-ups due to signals are also
provided.

Usage
-----

The algorithm (Wait-Die vs Wound-Wait) is chosen by using either
DEFINE_WW_CLASS() (Wound-Wait) or DEFINE_WD_CLASS() (Wait-Die)
As a rough rule of thumb, use Wound-Wait iff you
expect the number of simultaneous competing transactions to be typically small,
and you want to reduce the number of rollbacks.

Three different ways to acquire locks within the same w/w class. Common
definitions for methods #1 and #2::

  static DEFINE_WW_CLASS(ww_class);

  struct obj {
	struct ww_mutex lock;
	/* obj data */
  };

  struct obj_entry {
	struct list_head head;
	struct obj *obj;
  };

Method 1, using a list in execbuf->buffers that's not allowed to be reordered.
This is useful if a list of required objects is already tracked somewhere.
Furthermore the lock helper can use propagate the -EALREADY return code back to
the caller as a signal that an object is twice on the list. This is useful if
the list is constructed from userspace input and the ABI requires userspace to
not have duplicate entries (e.g. for a gpu commandbuffer submission ioctl)::

  int lock_objs(struct list_head *list, struct ww_acquire_ctx *ctx)
  {
	struct obj *res_obj = NULL;
	struct obj_entry *contended_entry = NULL;
	struct obj_entry *entry;

	ww_acquire_init(ctx, &ww_class);

  retry:
	list_for_each_entry (entry, list, head) {
		if (entry->obj == res_obj) {
			res_obj = NULL;
			continue;
		}
		ret = ww_mutex_lock(&entry->obj->lock, ctx);
		if (ret < 0) {
			contended_entry = entry;
			goto err;
		}
	}

	ww_acquire_done(ctx);
	return 0;

  err:
	list_for_each_entry_continue_reverse (entry, list, head)
		ww_mutex_unlock(&entry->obj->lock);

	if (res_obj)
		ww_mutex_unlock(&res_obj->lock);

	if (ret == -EDEADLK) {
		/* we lost out in a seqno race, lock and retry.. */
		ww_mutex_lock_slow(&contended_entry->obj->lock, ctx);
		res_obj = contended_entry->obj;
		goto retry;
	}
	ww_acquire_fini(ctx);

	return ret;
  }

Method 2, using a list in execbuf->buffers that can be reordered. Same semantics
of duplicate entry detection using -EALREADY as method 1 above. But the
list-reordering allows for a bit more idiomatic code::

  int lock_objs(struct list_head *list, struct ww_acquire_ctx *ctx)
  {
	struct obj_entry *entry, *entry2;

	ww_acquire_init(ctx, &ww_class);

	list_for_each_entry (entry, list, head) {
		ret = ww_mutex_lock(&entry->obj->lock, ctx);
		if (ret < 0) {
			entry2 = entry;

			list_for_each_entry_continue_reverse (entry2, list, head)
				ww_mutex_unlock(&entry2->obj->lock);

			if (ret != -EDEADLK) {
				ww_acquire_fini(ctx);
				return ret;
			}

			/* we lost out in a seqno race, lock and retry.. */
			ww_mutex_lock_slow(&entry->obj->lock, ctx);

			/*
			 * Move buf to head of the list, this will point
			 * buf->next to the first unlocked entry,
			 * restarting the for loop.
			 */
			list_del(&entry->head);
			list_add(&entry->head, list);
		}
	}

	ww_acquire_done(ctx);
	return 0;
  }

Unlocking works the same way for both methods #1 and #2::

  void unlock_objs(struct list_head *list, struct ww_acquire_ctx *ctx)
  {
	struct obj_entry *entry;

	list_for_each_entry (entry, list, head)
		ww_mutex_unlock(&entry->obj->lock);

	ww_acquire_fini(ctx);
  }

Method 3 is useful if the list of objects is constructed ad-hoc and not upfront,
e.g. when adjusting edges in a graph where each node has its own ww_mutex lock,
and edges can only be changed when holding the locks of all involved nodes. w/w
mutexes are a natural fit for such a case for two reasons:

- They can handle lock-acquisition in any order which allows us to start walking
  a graph from a starting point and then iteratively discovering new edges and
  locking down the nodes those edges connect to.
- Due to the -EALREADY return code signalling that a given objects is already
  held there's no need for additional book-keeping to break cycles in the graph
  or keep track off which looks are already held (when using more than one node
  as a starting point).

Note that this approach differs in two important ways from the above methods:

- Since the list of objects is dynamically constructed (and might very well be
  different when retrying due to hitting the -EDEADLK die condition) there's
  no need to keep any object on a persistent list when it's not locked. We can
  therefore move the list_head into the object itself.
- On the other hand the dynamic object list construction also means that the -EALREADY return
  code can't be propagated.

Note also that methods #1 and #2 and method #3 can be combined, e.g. to first lock a
list of starting nodes (passed in from userspace) using one of the above
methods. And then lock any additional objects affected by the operations using
method #3 below. The backoff/retry procedure will be a bit more involved, since
when the dynamic locking step hits -EDEADLK we also need to unlock all the
objects acquired with the fixed list. But the w/w mutex debug checks will catch
any interface misuse for these cases.

Also, method 3 can't fail the lock acquisition step since it doesn't return
-EALREADY. Of course this would be different when using the _interruptible
variants, but that's outside of the scope of these examples here::

  struct obj {
	struct ww_mutex ww_mutex;
	struct list_head locked_list;
  };

  static DEFINE_WW_CLASS(ww_class);

  void __unlock_objs(struct list_head *list)
  {
	struct obj *entry, *temp;

	list_for_each_entry_safe (entry, temp, list, locked_list) {
		/* need to do that before unlocking, since only the current lock holder is
		allowed to use object */
		list_del(&entry->locked_list);
		ww_mutex_unlock(entry->ww_mutex)
	}
  }

  void lock_objs(struct list_head *list, struct ww_acquire_ctx *ctx)
  {
	struct obj *obj;

	ww_acquire_init(ctx, &ww_class);

  retry:
	/* re-init loop start state */
	loop {
		/* magic code which walks over a graph and decides which objects
		 * to lock */

		ret = ww_mutex_lock(obj->ww_mutex, ctx);
		if (ret == -EALREADY) {
			/* we have that one already, get to the next object */
			continue;
		}
		if (ret == -EDEADLK) {
			__unlock_objs(list);

			ww_mutex_lock_slow(obj, ctx);
			list_add(&entry->locked_list, list);
			goto retry;
		}

		/* locked a new object, add it to the list */
		list_add_tail(&entry->locked_list, list);
	}

	ww_acquire_done(ctx);
	return 0;
  }

  void unlock_objs(struct list_head *list, struct ww_acquire_ctx *ctx)
  {
	__unlock_objs(list);
	ww_acquire_fini(ctx);
  }

Method 4: Only lock one single objects. In that case deadlock detection and
prevention is obviously overkill, since with grabbing just one lock you can't
produce a deadlock within just one class. To simplify this case the w/w mutex
api can be used with a NULL context.

Implementation Details
----------------------

Design:
^^^^^^^

  ww_mutex currently encapsulates a struct mutex, this means no extra overhead for
  normal mutex locks, which are far more common. As such there is only a small
  increase in code size if wait/wound mutexes are not used.

  We maintain the following invariants for the wait list:

  (1) Waiters with an acquire context are sorted by stamp order; waiters
      without an acquire context are interspersed in FIFO order.
  (2) For Wait-Die, among waiters with contexts, only the first one can have
      other locks acquired already (ctx->acquired > 0). Note that this waiter
      may come after other waiters without contexts in the list.

  The Wound-Wait preemption is implemented with a lazy-preemption scheme:
  The wounded status of the transaction is checked only when there is
  contention for a new lock and hence a true chance of deadlock. In that
  situation, if the transaction is wounded, it backs off, clears the
  wounded status and retries. A great benefit of implementing preemption in
  this way is that the wounded transaction can identify a contending lock to
  wait for before restarting the transaction. Just blindly restarting the
  transaction would likely make the transaction end up in a situation where
  it would have to back off again.

  In general, not much contention is expected. The locks are typically used to
  serialize access to resources for devices, and optimization focus should
  therefore be directed towards the uncontended cases.

Lockdep:
^^^^^^^^

  Special care has been taken to warn for as many cases of api abuse
  as possible. Some common api abuses will be caught with
  CONFIG_DEBUG_MUTEXES, but CONFIG_PROVE_LOCKING is recommended.

  Some of the errors which will be warned about:
   - Forgetting to call ww_acquire_fini or ww_acquire_init.
   - Attempting to lock more mutexes after ww_acquire_done.
   - Attempting to lock the wrong mutex after -EDEADLK and
     unlocking all mutexes.
   - Attempting to lock the right mutex after -EDEADLK,
     before unlocking all mutexes.

   - Calling ww_mutex_lock_slow before -EDEADLK was returned.

   - Unlocking mutexes with the wrong unlock function.
   - Calling one of the ww_acquire_* twice on the same context.
   - Using a different ww_class for the mutex than for the ww_acquire_ctx.
   - Normal lockdep errors that can result in deadlocks.

  Some of the lockdep errors that can result in deadlocks:
   - Calling ww_acquire_init to initialize a second ww_acquire_ctx before
     having called ww_acquire_fini on the first.
   - 'normal' deadlocks that can occur.

FIXME:
  Update this section once we have the TASK_DEADLOCK task state flag magic
  implemented.
=========
Active MM
=========

Note, the mm_count refcount may no longer include the "lazy" users
(running tasks with ->active_mm == mm && ->mm == NULL) on kernels
with CONFIG_MMU_LAZY_TLB_REFCOUNT=n. Taking and releasing these lazy
references must be done with mmgrab_lazy_tlb() and mmdrop_lazy_tlb()
helpers, which abstract this config option.

::

 List:       linux-kernel
 Subject:    Re: active_mm
 From:       Linus Torvalds <torvalds () transmeta ! com>
 Date:       1999-07-30 21:36:24

 Cc'd to linux-kernel, because I don't write explanations all that often,
 and when I do I feel better about more people reading them.

 On Fri, 30 Jul 1999, David Mosberger wrote:
 >
 > Is there a brief description someplace on how "mm" vs. "active_mm" in
 > the task_struct are supposed to be used?  (My apologies if this was
 > discussed on the mailing lists---I just returned from vacation and
 > wasn't able to follow linux-kernel for a while).

 Basically, the new setup is:

  - we have "real address spaces" and "anonymous address spaces". The
    difference is that an anonymous address space doesn't care about the
    user-level page tables at all, so when we do a context switch into an
    anonymous address space we just leave the previous address space
    active.

    The obvious use for a "anonymous address space" is any thread that
    doesn't need any user mappings - all kernel threads basically fall into
    this category, but even "real" threads can temporarily say that for
    some amount of time they are not going to be interested in user space,
    and that the scheduler might as well try to avoid wasting time on
    switching the VM state around. Currently only the old-style bdflush
    sync does that.

  - "tsk->mm" points to the "real address space". For an anonymous process,
    tsk->mm will be NULL, for the logical reason that an anonymous process
    really doesn't _have_ a real address space at all.

  - however, we obviously need to keep track of which address space we
    "stole" for such an anonymous user. For that, we have "tsk->active_mm",
    which shows what the currently active address space is.

    The rule is that for a process with a real address space (ie tsk->mm is
    non-NULL) the active_mm obviously always has to be the same as the real
    one.

    For a anonymous process, tsk->mm == NULL, and tsk->active_mm is the
    "borrowed" mm while the anonymous process is running. When the
    anonymous process gets scheduled away, the borrowed address space is
    returned and cleared.

 To support all that, the "struct mm_struct" now has two counters: a
 "mm_users" counter that is how many "real address space users" there are,
 and a "mm_count" counter that is the number of "lazy" users (ie anonymous
 users) plus one if there are any real users.

 Usually there is at least one real user, but it could be that the real
 user exited on another CPU while a lazy user was still active, so you do
 actually get cases where you have a address space that is _only_ used by
 lazy users. That is often a short-lived state, because once that thread
 gets scheduled away in favour of a real thread, the "zombie" mm gets
 released because "mm_count" becomes zero.

 Also, a new rule is that _nobody_ ever has "init_mm" as a real MM any
 more. "init_mm" should be considered just a "lazy context when no other
 context is available", and in fact it is mainly used just at bootup when
 no real VM has yet been created. So code that used to check

 	if (current->mm == &init_mm)

 should generally just do

 	if (!current->mm)

 instead (which makes more sense anyway - the test is basically one of "do
 we have a user context", and is generally done by the page fault handler
 and things like that).

 Anyway, I put a pre-patch-2.3.13-1 on ftp.kernel.org just a moment ago,
 because it slightly changes the interfaces to accommodate the alpha (who
 would have thought it, but the alpha actually ends up having one of the
 ugliest context switch codes - unlike the other architectures where the MM
 and register state is separate, the alpha PALcode joins the two, and you
 need to switch both together).

 (From http://marc.info/?l=linux-kernel&m=93337278602211&w=2)
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===========================
MEMORY ALLOCATION PROFILING
===========================

Low overhead (suitable for production) accounting of all memory allocations,
tracked by file and line number.

Usage:
kconfig options:
- CONFIG_MEM_ALLOC_PROFILING

- CONFIG_MEM_ALLOC_PROFILING_ENABLED_BY_DEFAULT

- CONFIG_MEM_ALLOC_PROFILING_DEBUG
  adds warnings for allocations that weren't accounted because of a
  missing annotation

Boot parameter:
  sysctl.vm.mem_profiling=0|1|never

  When set to "never", memory allocation profiling overhead is minimized and it
  cannot be enabled at runtime (sysctl becomes read-only).
  When CONFIG_MEM_ALLOC_PROFILING_ENABLED_BY_DEFAULT=y, default value is "1".
  When CONFIG_MEM_ALLOC_PROFILING_ENABLED_BY_DEFAULT=n, default value is "never".

sysctl:
  /proc/sys/vm/mem_profiling

Runtime info:
  /proc/allocinfo

Example output::

  root@moria-kvm:~# sort -g /proc/allocinfo|tail|numfmt --to=iec
        2.8M    22648 fs/kernfs/dir.c:615 func:__kernfs_new_node
        3.8M      953 mm/memory.c:4214 func:alloc_anon_folio
        4.0M     1010 drivers/staging/ctagmod/ctagmod.c:20 [ctagmod] func:ctagmod_start
        4.1M        4 net/netfilter/nf_conntrack_core.c:2567 func:nf_ct_alloc_hashtable
        6.0M     1532 mm/filemap.c:1919 func:__filemap_get_folio
        8.8M     2785 kernel/fork.c:307 func:alloc_thread_stack_node
         13M      234 block/blk-mq.c:3421 func:blk_mq_alloc_rqs
         14M     3520 mm/mm_init.c:2530 func:alloc_large_system_hash
         15M     3656 mm/readahead.c:247 func:page_cache_ra_unbounded
         55M     4887 mm/slub.c:2259 func:alloc_slab_page
        122M    31168 mm/page_ext.c:270 func:alloc_page_ext

Theory of operation
===================

Memory allocation profiling builds off of code tagging, which is a library for
declaring static structs (that typically describe a file and line number in
some way, hence code tagging) and then finding and operating on them at runtime,
- i.e. iterating over them to print them in debugfs/procfs.

To add accounting for an allocation call, we replace it with a macro
invocation, alloc_hooks(), that
- declares a code tag
- stashes a pointer to it in task_struct
- calls the real allocation function
- and finally, restores the task_struct alloc tag pointer to its previous value.

This allows for alloc_hooks() calls to be nested, with the most recent one
taking effect. This is important for allocations internal to the mm/ code that
do not properly belong to the outer allocation context and should be counted
separately: for example, slab object extension vectors, or when the slab
allocates pages from the page allocator.

Thus, proper usage requires determining which function in an allocation call
stack should be tagged. There are many helper functions that essentially wrap
e.g. kmalloc() and do a little more work, then are called in multiple places;
we'll generally want the accounting to happen in the callers of these helpers,
not in the helpers themselves.

To fix up a given helper, for example foo(), do the following:
- switch its allocation call to the _noprof() version, e.g. kmalloc_noprof()

- rename it to foo_noprof()

- define a macro version of foo() like so:

  #define foo(...) alloc_hooks(foo_noprof(__VA_ARGS__))

It's also possible to stash a pointer to an alloc tag in your own data structures.

Do this when you're implementing a generic data structure that does allocations
"on behalf of" some other code - for example, the rhashtable code. This way,
instead of seeing a large line in /proc/allocinfo for rhashtable.c, we can
break it out by rhashtable type.

To do so:
- Hook your data structure's init function, like any other allocation function.

- Within your init function, use the convenience macro alloc_tag_record() to
  record alloc tag in your data structure.

- Then, use the following form for your allocations:
  alloc_hooks_tag(ht->your_saved_tag, kmalloc_noprof(...))
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===============================
Architecture Page Table Helpers
===============================

Generic MM expects architectures (with MMU) to provide helpers to create, access
and modify page table entries at various level for different memory functions.
These page table helpers need to conform to a common semantics across platforms.
Following tables describe the expected semantics which can also be tested during
boot via CONFIG_DEBUG_VM_PGTABLE option. All future changes in here or the debug
test need to be in sync.


PTE Page Table Helpers
======================

+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_same                  | Tests whether both PTE entries are the same      |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_present               | Tests a valid mapped PTE                         |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_young                 | Tests a young PTE                                |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_dirty                 | Tests a dirty PTE                                |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_write                 | Tests a writable PTE                             |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_special               | Tests a special PTE                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_protnone              | Tests a PROT_NONE PTE                            |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_devmap                | Tests a ZONE_DEVICE mapped PTE                   |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_soft_dirty            | Tests a soft dirty PTE                           |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_swp_soft_dirty        | Tests a soft dirty swapped PTE                   |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mkyoung               | Creates a young PTE                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mkold                 | Creates an old PTE                               |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mkdirty               | Creates a dirty PTE                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mkclean               | Creates a clean PTE                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mkwrite               | Creates a writable PTE of the type specified by  |
|                           | the VMA.                                         |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mkwrite_novma         | Creates a writable PTE, of the conventional type |
|                           | of writable.                                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_wrprotect             | Creates a write protected PTE                    |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mkspecial             | Creates a special PTE                            |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mkdevmap              | Creates a ZONE_DEVICE mapped PTE                 |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mksoft_dirty          | Creates a soft dirty PTE                         |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_clear_soft_dirty      | Clears a soft dirty PTE                          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_swp_mksoft_dirty      | Creates a soft dirty swapped PTE                 |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_swp_clear_soft_dirty  | Clears a soft dirty swapped PTE                  |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_mknotpresent          | Invalidates a mapped PTE                         |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ptep_clear                | Clears a PTE                                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ptep_get_and_clear        | Clears and returns PTE                           |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ptep_get_and_clear_full   | Clears and returns PTE (batched PTE unmap)       |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ptep_test_and_clear_young | Clears young from a PTE                          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ptep_set_wrprotect        | Converts into a write protected PTE              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| ptep_set_access_flags     | Converts into a more permissive PTE              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+


PMD Page Table Helpers
======================

+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_same                  | Tests whether both PMD entries are the same      |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_bad                   | Tests a non-table mapped PMD                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_leaf                  | Tests a leaf mapped PMD                          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_trans_huge            | Tests a Transparent Huge Page (THP) at PMD       |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_present               | Tests whether pmd_page() points to valid memory  |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_young                 | Tests a young PMD                                |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_dirty                 | Tests a dirty PMD                                |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_write                 | Tests a writable PMD                             |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_special               | Tests a special PMD                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_protnone              | Tests a PROT_NONE PMD                            |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_devmap                | Tests a ZONE_DEVICE mapped PMD                   |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_soft_dirty            | Tests a soft dirty PMD                           |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_swp_soft_dirty        | Tests a soft dirty swapped PMD                   |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mkyoung               | Creates a young PMD                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mkold                 | Creates an old PMD                               |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mkdirty               | Creates a dirty PMD                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mkclean               | Creates a clean PMD                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mkwrite               | Creates a writable PMD of the type specified by  |
|                           | the VMA.                                         |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mkwrite_novma         | Creates a writable PMD, of the conventional type |
|                           | of writable.                                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_wrprotect             | Creates a write protected PMD                    |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mkspecial             | Creates a special PMD                            |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mkdevmap              | Creates a ZONE_DEVICE mapped PMD                 |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mksoft_dirty          | Creates a soft dirty PMD                         |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_clear_soft_dirty      | Clears a soft dirty PMD                          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_swp_mksoft_dirty      | Creates a soft dirty swapped PMD                 |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_swp_clear_soft_dirty  | Clears a soft dirty swapped PMD                  |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_mkinvalid             | Invalidates a present PMD; do not call for       |
|                           | non-present PMD [1]                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_set_huge              | Creates a PMD huge mapping                       |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmd_clear_huge            | Clears a PMD huge mapping                        |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmdp_get_and_clear        | Clears a PMD                                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmdp_get_and_clear_full   | Clears a PMD                                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmdp_test_and_clear_young | Clears young from a PMD                          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmdp_set_wrprotect        | Converts into a write protected PMD              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pmdp_set_access_flags     | Converts into a more permissive PMD              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+


PUD Page Table Helpers
======================

+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_same                  | Tests whether both PUD entries are the same      |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_bad                   | Tests a non-table mapped PUD                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_leaf                  | Tests a leaf mapped PUD                          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_trans_huge            | Tests a Transparent Huge Page (THP) at PUD       |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_present               | Tests a valid mapped PUD                         |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_young                 | Tests a young PUD                                |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_dirty                 | Tests a dirty PUD                                |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_write                 | Tests a writable PUD                             |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_devmap                | Tests a ZONE_DEVICE mapped PUD                   |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_mkyoung               | Creates a young PUD                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_mkold                 | Creates an old PUD                               |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_mkdirty               | Creates a dirty PUD                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_mkclean               | Creates a clean PUD                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_mkwrite               | Creates a writable PUD                           |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_wrprotect             | Creates a write protected PUD                    |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_mkdevmap              | Creates a ZONE_DEVICE mapped PUD                 |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_mkinvalid             | Invalidates a present PUD; do not call for       |
|                           | non-present PUD [1]                              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_set_huge              | Creates a PUD huge mapping                       |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pud_clear_huge            | Clears a PUD huge mapping                        |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pudp_get_and_clear        | Clears a PUD                                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pudp_get_and_clear_full   | Clears a PUD                                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pudp_test_and_clear_young | Clears young from a PUD                          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pudp_set_wrprotect        | Converts into a write protected PUD              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pudp_set_access_flags     | Converts into a more permissive PUD              |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+


HugeTLB Page Table Helpers
==========================

+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| pte_huge                  | Tests a HugeTLB                                  |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| arch_make_huge_pte        | Creates a HugeTLB                                |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| huge_pte_dirty            | Tests a dirty HugeTLB                            |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| huge_pte_write            | Tests a writable HugeTLB                         |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| huge_pte_mkdirty          | Creates a dirty HugeTLB                          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| huge_pte_mkwrite          | Creates a writable HugeTLB                       |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| huge_pte_wrprotect        | Creates a write protected HugeTLB                |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| huge_ptep_get_and_clear   | Clears a HugeTLB                                 |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| huge_ptep_set_wrprotect   | Converts into a write protected HugeTLB          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| huge_ptep_set_access_flags  | Converts into a more permissive HugeTLB        |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+


SWAP Page Table Helpers
========================

+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| __pte_to_swp_entry        | Creates a swapped entry (arch) from a mapped PTE |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| __swp_to_pte_entry        | Creates a mapped PTE from a swapped entry (arch) |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| __pmd_to_swp_entry        | Creates a swapped entry (arch) from a mapped PMD |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| __swp_to_pmd_entry        | Creates a mapped PMD from a swapped entry (arch) |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| is_migration_entry        | Tests a migration (read or write) swapped entry  |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| is_writable_migration_entry   | Tests a write migration swapped entry        |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| make_readable_migration_entry | Creates a read migration swapped entry       |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| make_writable_migration_entry | Creates a write migration swapped entry      |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+

[1] https://lore.kernel.org/linux-mm/20181017020930.GN30832@redhat.com/
================
Memory Balancing
================

Started Jan 2000 by Kanoj Sarcar <kanoj@sgi.com>

Memory balancing is needed for !__GFP_HIGH and !__GFP_KSWAPD_RECLAIM as
well as for non __GFP_IO allocations.

The first reason why a caller may avoid reclaim is that the caller can not
sleep due to holding a spinlock or is in interrupt context. The second may
be that the caller is willing to fail the allocation without incurring the
overhead of page reclaim. This may happen for opportunistic high-order
allocation requests that have order-0 fallback options. In such cases,
the caller may also wish to avoid waking kswapd.

__GFP_IO allocation requests are made to prevent file system deadlocks.

In the absence of non sleepable allocation requests, it seems detrimental
to be doing balancing. Page reclamation can be kicked off lazily, that
is, only when needed (aka zone free memory is 0), instead of making it
a proactive process.

That being said, the kernel should try to fulfill requests for direct
mapped pages from the direct mapped pool, instead of falling back on
the dma pool, so as to keep the dma pool filled for dma requests (atomic
or not). A similar argument applies to highmem and direct mapped pages.
OTOH, if there is a lot of free dma pages, it is preferable to satisfy
regular memory requests by allocating one from the dma pool, instead
of incurring the overhead of regular zone balancing.

In 2.2, memory balancing/page reclamation would kick off only when the
_total_ number of free pages fell below 1/64 th of total memory. With the
right ratio of dma and regular memory, it is quite possible that balancing
would not be done even when the dma zone was completely empty. 2.2 has
been running production machines of varying memory sizes, and seems to be
doing fine even with the presence of this problem. In 2.3, due to
HIGHMEM, this problem is aggravated.

In 2.3, zone balancing can be done in one of two ways: depending on the
zone size (and possibly of the size of lower class zones), we can decide
at init time how many free pages we should aim for while balancing any
zone. The good part is, while balancing, we do not need to look at sizes
of lower class zones, the bad part is, we might do too frequent balancing
due to ignoring possibly lower usage in the lower class zones. Also,
with a slight change in the allocation routine, it is possible to reduce
the memclass() macro to be a simple equality.

Another possible solution is that we balance only when the free memory
of a zone _and_ all its lower class zones falls below 1/64th of the
total memory in the zone and its lower class zones. This fixes the 2.2
balancing problem, and stays as close to 2.2 behavior as possible. Also,
the balancing algorithm works the same way on the various architectures,
which have different numbers and types of zones. If we wanted to get
fancy, we could assign different weights to free pages in different
zones in the future.

Note that if the size of the regular zone is huge compared to dma zone,
it becomes less significant to consider the free dma pages while
deciding whether to balance the regular zone. The first solution
becomes more attractive then.

The appended patch implements the second solution. It also "fixes" two
problems: first, kswapd is woken up as in 2.2 on low memory conditions
for non-sleepable allocations. Second, the HIGHMEM zone is also balanced,
so as to give a fighting chance for replace_with_highmem() to get a
HIGHMEM page, as well as to ensure that HIGHMEM allocations do not
fall back into regular zone. This also makes sure that HIGHMEM pages
are not leaked (for example, in situations where a HIGHMEM page is in
the swapcache but is not being used by anyone)

kswapd also needs to know about the zones it should balance. kswapd is
primarily needed in a situation where balancing can not be done,
probably because all allocation requests are coming from intr context
and all process contexts are sleeping. For 2.3, kswapd does not really
need to balance the highmem zone, since intr context does not request
highmem pages. kswapd looks at the zone_wake_kswapd field in the zone
structure to decide whether a zone needs balancing.

Page stealing from process memory and shm is done if stealing the page would
alleviate memory pressure on any zone in the page's node that has fallen below
its watermark.

watemark[WMARK_MIN/WMARK_LOW/WMARK_HIGH]/low_on_memory/zone_wake_kswapd: These
are per-zone fields, used to determine when a zone needs to be balanced. When
the number of pages falls below watermark[WMARK_MIN], the hysteric field
low_on_memory gets set. This stays set till the number of free pages becomes
watermark[WMARK_HIGH]. When low_on_memory is set, page allocation requests will
try to free some pages in the zone (providing GFP_WAIT is set in the request).
Orthogonal to this, is the decision to poke kswapd to free some zone pages.
That decision is not hysteresis based, and is done when the number of free
pages is below watermark[WMARK_LOW]; in which case zone_wake_kswapd is also set.


(Good) Ideas that I have heard:

1. Dynamic experience should influence balancing: number of failed requests
   for a zone can be tracked and fed into the balancing scheme (jalvo@mbay.net)
2. Implement a replace_with_highmem()-like replace_with_regular() to preserve
   dma pages. (lkd@tantalophile.demon.co.uk)
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===========
Boot Memory
===========
=====================
Free Page Reporting
=====================

Free page reporting is an API by which a device can register to receive
lists of pages that are currently unused by the system. This is useful in
the case of virtualization where a guest is then able to use this data to
notify the hypervisor that it is no longer using certain pages in memory.

For the driver, typically a balloon driver, to use of this functionality
it will allocate and initialize a page_reporting_dev_info structure. The
field within the structure it will populate is the "report" function
pointer used to process the scatterlist. It must also guarantee that it can
handle at least PAGE_REPORTING_CAPACITY worth of scatterlist entries per
call to the function. A call to page_reporting_register will register the
page reporting interface with the reporting framework assuming no other
page reporting devices are already registered.

Once registered the page reporting API will begin reporting batches of
pages to the driver. The API will start reporting pages 2 seconds after
the interface is registered and will continue to do so 2 seconds after any
page of a sufficiently high order is freed.

Pages reported will be stored in the scatterlist passed to the reporting
function with the final entry having the end bit set in entry nent - 1.
While pages are being processed by the report function they will not be
accessible to the allocator. Once the report function has been completed
the pages will be returned to the free area from which they were obtained.

Prior to removing a driver that is making use of free page reporting it
is necessary to call page_reporting_unregister to have the
page_reporting_dev_info structure that is currently in use by free page
reporting removed. Doing this will prevent further reports from being
issued via the interface. If another driver or the same driver is
registered it is possible for it to resume where the previous driver had
left off in terms of reporting free pages.

Alexander Duyck, Dec 04, 2019
====================
High Memory Handling
====================

By: Peter Zijlstra <a.p.zijlstra@chello.nl>

.. contents:: :local:

What Is High Memory?
====================

High memory (highmem) is used when the size of physical memory approaches or
exceeds the maximum size of virtual memory.  At that point it becomes
impossible for the kernel to keep all of the available physical memory mapped
at all times.  This means the kernel needs to start using temporary mappings of
the pieces of physical memory that it wants to access.

The part of (physical) memory not covered by a permanent mapping is what we
refer to as 'highmem'.  There are various architecture dependent constraints on
where exactly that border lies.

In the i386 arch, for example, we choose to map the kernel into every process's
VM space so that we don't have to pay the full TLB invalidation costs for
kernel entry/exit.  This means the available virtual memory space (4GiB on
i386) has to be divided between user and kernel space.

The traditional split for architectures using this approach is 3:1, 3GiB for
userspace and the top 1GiB for kernel space::

		+--------+ 0xffffffff
		| Kernel |
		+--------+ 0xc0000000
		|        |
		| User   |
		|        |
		+--------+ 0x00000000

This means that the kernel can at most map 1GiB of physical memory at any one
time, but because we need virtual address space for other things - including
temporary maps to access the rest of the physical memory - the actual direct
map will typically be less (usually around ~896MiB).

Other architectures that have mm context tagged TLBs can have separate kernel
and user maps.  Some hardware (like some ARMs), however, have limited virtual
space when they use mm context tags.


Temporary Virtual Mappings
==========================

The kernel contains several ways of creating temporary mappings. The following
list shows them in order of preference of use.

* kmap_local_page(), kmap_local_folio() - These functions are used to create
  short term mappings. They can be invoked from any context (including
  interrupts) but the mappings can only be used in the context which acquired
  them. The only differences between them consist in the first taking a pointer
  to a struct page and the second taking a pointer to struct folio and the byte
  offset within the folio which identifies the page.

  These functions should always be used, whereas kmap_atomic() and kmap() have
  been deprecated.

  These mappings are thread-local and CPU-local, meaning that the mapping
  can only be accessed from within this thread and the thread is bound to the
  CPU while the mapping is active. Although preemption is never disabled by
  this function, the CPU can not be unplugged from the system via
  CPU-hotplug until the mapping is disposed.

  It's valid to take pagefaults in a local kmap region, unless the context
  in which the local mapping is acquired does not allow it for other reasons.

  As said, pagefaults and preemption are never disabled. There is no need to
  disable preemption because, when context switches to a different task, the
  maps of the outgoing task are saved and those of the incoming one are
  restored.

  kmap_local_page(), as well as kmap_local_folio() always returns valid virtual
  kernel addresses and it is assumed that kunmap_local() will never fail.

  On CONFIG_HIGHMEM=n kernels and for low memory pages they return the
  virtual address of the direct mapping. Only real highmem pages are
  temporarily mapped. Therefore, users may call a plain page_address()
  for pages which are known to not come from ZONE_HIGHMEM. However, it is
  always safe to use kmap_local_{page,folio}() / kunmap_local().

  While they are significantly faster than kmap(), for the highmem case they
  come with restrictions about the pointers validity. Contrary to kmap()
  mappings, the local mappings are only valid in the context of the caller
  and cannot be handed to other contexts. This implies that users must
  be absolutely sure to keep the use of the return address local to the
  thread which mapped it.

  Most code can be designed to use thread local mappings. User should
  therefore try to design their code to avoid the use of kmap() by mapping
  pages in the same thread the address will be used and prefer
  kmap_local_page() or kmap_local_folio().

  Nesting kmap_local_page() and kmap_atomic() mappings is allowed to a certain
  extent (up to KMAP_TYPE_NR) but their invocations have to be strictly ordered
  because the map implementation is stack based. See kmap_local_page() kdocs
  (included in the "Functions" section) for details on how to manage nested
  mappings.

* kmap_atomic(). This function has been deprecated; use kmap_local_page().

  NOTE: Conversions to kmap_local_page() must take care to follow the mapping
  restrictions imposed on kmap_local_page(). Furthermore, the code between
  calls to kmap_atomic() and kunmap_atomic() may implicitly depend on the side
  effects of atomic mappings, i.e. disabling page faults or preemption, or both.
  In that case, explicit calls to pagefault_disable() or preempt_disable() or
  both must be made in conjunction with the use of kmap_local_page().

  [Legacy documentation]

  This permits a very short duration mapping of a single page.  Since the
  mapping is restricted to the CPU that issued it, it performs well, but
  the issuing task is therefore required to stay on that CPU until it has
  finished, lest some other task displace its mappings.

  kmap_atomic() may also be used by interrupt contexts, since it does not
  sleep and the callers too may not sleep until after kunmap_atomic() is
  called.

  Each call of kmap_atomic() in the kernel creates a non-preemptible section
  and disable pagefaults. This could be a source of unwanted latency. Therefore
  users should prefer kmap_local_page() instead of kmap_atomic().

  It is assumed that k[un]map_atomic() won't fail.

* kmap(). This function has been deprecated; use kmap_local_page().

  NOTE: Conversions to kmap_local_page() must take care to follow the mapping
  restrictions imposed on kmap_local_page(). In particular, it is necessary to
  make sure that the kernel virtual memory pointer is only valid in the thread
  that obtained it.

  [Legacy documentation]

  This should be used to make short duration mapping of a single page with no
  restrictions on preemption or migration. It comes with an overhead as mapping
  space is restricted and protected by a global lock for synchronization. When
  mapping is no longer needed, the address that the page was mapped to must be
  released with kunmap().

  Mapping changes must be propagated across all the CPUs. kmap() also
  requires global TLB invalidation when the kmap's pool wraps and it might
  block when the mapping space is fully utilized until a slot becomes
  available. Therefore, kmap() is only callable from preemptible context.

  All the above work is necessary if a mapping must last for a relatively
  long time but the bulk of high-memory mappings in the kernel are
  short-lived and only used in one place. This means that the cost of
  kmap() is mostly wasted in such cases. kmap() was not intended for long
  term mappings but it has morphed in that direction and its use is
  strongly discouraged in newer code and the set of the preceding functions
  should be preferred.

  On 64-bit systems, calls to kmap_local_page(), kmap_atomic() and kmap() have
  no real work to do because a 64-bit address space is more than sufficient to
  address all the physical memory whose pages are permanently mapped.

* vmap().  This can be used to make a long duration mapping of multiple
  physical pages into a contiguous virtual space.  It needs global
  synchronization to unmap.


Cost of Temporary Mappings
==========================

The cost of creating temporary mappings can be quite high.  The arch has to
manipulate the kernel's page tables, the data TLB and/or the MMU's registers.

If CONFIG_HIGHMEM is not set, then the kernel will try and create a mapping
simply with a bit of arithmetic that will convert the page struct address into
a pointer to the page contents rather than juggling mappings about.  In such a
case, the unmap operation may be a null operation.

If CONFIG_MMU is not set, then there can be no temporary mappings and no
highmem.  In such a case, the arithmetic approach will also be used.


i386 PAE
========

The i386 arch, under some circumstances, will permit you to stick up to 64GiB
of RAM into your 32-bit machine.  This has a number of consequences:

* Linux needs a page-frame structure for each page in the system and the
  pageframes need to live in the permanent mapping, which means:

* you can have 896M/sizeof(struct page) page-frames at most; with struct
  page being 32-bytes that would end up being something in the order of 112G
  worth of pages; the kernel, however, needs to store more than just
  page-frames in that memory...

* PAE makes your page tables larger - which slows the system down as more
  data has to be accessed to traverse in TLB fills and the like.  One
  advantage is that PAE has more PTE bits and can provide advanced features
  like NX and PAT.

The general recommendation is that you don't use more than 8GiB on a 32-bit
machine - although more might work for you and your workload, you're pretty
much on your own - don't expect kernel developers to really care much if things
come apart.


Functions
=========

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/highmem.h
.. kernel-doc:: mm/highmem.c
.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/highmem-internal.h
=====================================
Heterogeneous Memory Management (HMM)
=====================================

Provide infrastructure and helpers to integrate non-conventional memory (device
memory like GPU on board memory) into regular kernel path, with the cornerstone
of this being specialized struct page for such memory (see sections 5 to 7 of
this document).

HMM also provides optional helpers for SVM (Share Virtual Memory), i.e.,
allowing a device to transparently access program addresses coherently with
the CPU meaning that any valid pointer on the CPU is also a valid pointer
for the device. This is becoming mandatory to simplify the use of advanced
heterogeneous computing where GPU, DSP, or FPGA are used to perform various
computations on behalf of a process.

This document is divided as follows: in the first section I expose the problems
related to using device specific memory allocators. In the second section, I
expose the hardware limitations that are inherent to many platforms. The third
section gives an overview of the HMM design. The fourth section explains how
CPU page-table mirroring works and the purpose of HMM in this context. The
fifth section deals with how device memory is represented inside the kernel.
Finally, the last section presents a new migration helper that allows
leveraging the device DMA engine.

.. contents:: :local:

Problems of using a device specific memory allocator
====================================================

Devices with a large amount of on board memory (several gigabytes) like GPUs
have historically managed their memory through dedicated driver specific APIs.
This creates a disconnect between memory allocated and managed by a device
driver and regular application memory (private anonymous, shared memory, or
regular file backed memory). From here on I will refer to this aspect as split
address space. I use shared address space to refer to the opposite situation:
i.e., one in which any application memory region can be used by a device
transparently.

Split address space happens because devices can only access memory allocated
through a device specific API. This implies that all memory objects in a program
are not equal from the device point of view which complicates large programs
that rely on a wide set of libraries.

Concretely, this means that code that wants to leverage devices like GPUs needs
to copy objects between generically allocated memory (malloc, mmap private, mmap
share) and memory allocated through the device driver API (this still ends up
with an mmap but of the device file).

For flat data sets (array, grid, image, ...) this isn't too hard to achieve but
for complex data sets (list, tree, ...) it's hard to get right. Duplicating a
complex data set needs to re-map all the pointer relations between each of its
elements. This is error prone and programs get harder to debug because of the
duplicate data set and addresses.

Split address space also means that libraries cannot transparently use data
they are getting from the core program or another library and thus each library
might have to duplicate its input data set using the device specific memory
allocator. Large projects suffer from this and waste resources because of the
various memory copies.

Duplicating each library API to accept as input or output memory allocated by
each device specific allocator is not a viable option. It would lead to a
combinatorial explosion in the library entry points.

Finally, with the advance of high level language constructs (in C++ but in
other languages too) it is now possible for the compiler to leverage GPUs and
other devices without programmer knowledge. Some compiler identified patterns
are only doable with a shared address space. It is also more reasonable to use
a shared address space for all other patterns.


I/O bus, device memory characteristics
======================================

I/O buses cripple shared address spaces due to a few limitations. Most I/O
buses only allow basic memory access from device to main memory; even cache
coherency is often optional. Access to device memory from a CPU is even more
limited. More often than not, it is not cache coherent.

If we only consider the PCIE bus, then a device can access main memory (often
through an IOMMU) and be cache coherent with the CPUs. However, it only allows
a limited set of atomic operations from the device on main memory. This is worse
in the other direction: the CPU can only access a limited range of the device
memory and cannot perform atomic operations on it. Thus device memory cannot
be considered the same as regular memory from the kernel point of view.

Another crippling factor is the limited bandwidth (~32GBytes/s with PCIE 4.0
and 16 lanes). This is 33 times less than the fastest GPU memory (1 TBytes/s).
The final limitation is latency. Access to main memory from the device has an
order of magnitude higher latency than when the device accesses its own memory.

Some platforms are developing new I/O buses or additions/modifications to PCIE
to address some of these limitations (OpenCAPI, CCIX). They mainly allow
two-way cache coherency between CPU and device and allow all atomic operations the
architecture supports. Sadly, not all platforms are following this trend and
some major architectures are left without hardware solutions to these problems.

So for shared address space to make sense, not only must we allow devices to
access any memory but we must also permit any memory to be migrated to device
memory while the device is using it (blocking CPU access while it happens).


Shared address space and migration
==================================

HMM intends to provide two main features. The first one is to share the address
space by duplicating the CPU page table in the device page table so the same
address points to the same physical memory for any valid main memory address in
the process address space.

To achieve this, HMM offers a set of helpers to populate the device page table
while keeping track of CPU page table updates. Device page table updates are
not as easy as CPU page table updates. To update the device page table, you must
allocate a buffer (or use a pool of pre-allocated buffers) and write GPU
specific commands in it to perform the update (unmap, cache invalidations, and
flush, ...). This cannot be done through common code for all devices. Hence
why HMM provides helpers to factor out everything that can be while leaving the
hardware specific details to the device driver.

The second mechanism HMM provides is a new kind of ZONE_DEVICE memory that
allows allocating a struct page for each page of device memory. Those pages
are special because the CPU cannot map them. However, they allow migrating
main memory to device memory using existing migration mechanisms and everything
looks like a page that is swapped out to disk from the CPU point of view. Using a
struct page gives the easiest and cleanest integration with existing mm
mechanisms. Here again, HMM only provides helpers, first to hotplug new ZONE_DEVICE
memory for the device memory and second to perform migration. Policy decisions
of what and when to migrate is left to the device driver.

Note that any CPU access to a device page triggers a page fault and a migration
back to main memory. For example, when a page backing a given CPU address A is
migrated from a main memory page to a device page, then any CPU access to
address A triggers a page fault and initiates a migration back to main memory.

With these two features, HMM not only allows a device to mirror process address
space and keeps both CPU and device page tables synchronized, but also
leverages device memory by migrating the part of the data set that is actively being
used by the device.


Address space mirroring implementation and API
==============================================

Address space mirroring's main objective is to allow duplication of a range of
CPU page table into a device page table; HMM helps keep both synchronized. A
device driver that wants to mirror a process address space must start with the
registration of a mmu_interval_notifier::

 int mmu_interval_notifier_insert(struct mmu_interval_notifier *interval_sub,
				  struct mm_struct *mm, unsigned long start,
				  unsigned long length,
				  const struct mmu_interval_notifier_ops *ops);

During the ops->invalidate() callback the device driver must perform the
update action to the range (mark range read only, or fully unmap, etc.). The
device must complete the update before the driver callback returns.

When the device driver wants to populate a range of virtual addresses, it can
use::

  int hmm_range_fault(struct hmm_range *range);

It will trigger a page fault on missing or read-only entries if write access is
requested (see below). Page faults use the generic mm page fault code path just
like a CPU page fault. The usage pattern is::

 int driver_populate_range(...)
 {
      struct hmm_range range;
      ...

      range.notifier = &interval_sub;
      range.start = ...;
      range.end = ...;
      range.hmm_pfns = ...;

      if (!mmget_not_zero(interval_sub->notifier.mm))
          return -EFAULT;

 again:
      range.notifier_seq = mmu_interval_read_begin(&interval_sub);
      mmap_read_lock(mm);
      ret = hmm_range_fault(&range);
      if (ret) {
          mmap_read_unlock(mm);
          if (ret == -EBUSY)
                 goto again;
          return ret;
      }
      mmap_read_unlock(mm);

      take_lock(driver->update);
      if (mmu_interval_read_retry(&ni, range.notifier_seq) {
          release_lock(driver->update);
          goto again;
      }

      /* Use pfns array content to update device page table,
       * under the update lock */

      release_lock(driver->update);
      return 0;
 }

The driver->update lock is the same lock that the driver takes inside its
invalidate() callback. That lock must be held before calling
mmu_interval_read_retry() to avoid any race with a concurrent CPU page table
update.

Leverage default_flags and pfn_flags_mask
=========================================

The hmm_range struct has 2 fields, default_flags and pfn_flags_mask, that specify
fault or snapshot policy for the whole range instead of having to set them
for each entry in the pfns array.

For instance if the device driver wants pages for a range with at least read
permission, it sets::

    range->default_flags = HMM_PFN_REQ_FAULT;
    range->pfn_flags_mask = 0;

and calls hmm_range_fault() as described above. This will fill fault all pages
in the range with at least read permission.

Now let's say the driver wants to do the same except for one page in the range for
which it wants to have write permission. Now driver set::

    range->default_flags = HMM_PFN_REQ_FAULT;
    range->pfn_flags_mask = HMM_PFN_REQ_WRITE;
    range->pfns[index_of_write] = HMM_PFN_REQ_WRITE;

With this, HMM will fault in all pages with at least read (i.e., valid) and for the
address == range->start + (index_of_write << PAGE_SHIFT) it will fault with
write permission i.e., if the CPU pte does not have write permission set then HMM
will call handle_mm_fault().

After hmm_range_fault completes the flag bits are set to the current state of
the page tables, ie HMM_PFN_VALID | HMM_PFN_WRITE will be set if the page is
writable.


Represent and manage device memory from core kernel point of view
=================================================================

Several different designs were tried to support device memory. The first one
used a device specific data structure to keep information about migrated memory
and HMM hooked itself in various places of mm code to handle any access to
addresses that were backed by device memory. It turns out that this ended up
replicating most of the fields of struct page and also needed many kernel code
paths to be updated to understand this new kind of memory.

Most kernel code paths never try to access the memory behind a page
but only care about struct page contents. Because of this, HMM switched to
directly using struct page for device memory which left most kernel code paths
unaware of the difference. We only need to make sure that no one ever tries to
map those pages from the CPU side.

Migration to and from device memory
===================================

Because the CPU cannot access device memory directly, the device driver must
use hardware DMA or device specific load/store instructions to migrate data.
The migrate_vma_setup(), migrate_vma_pages(), and migrate_vma_finalize()
functions are designed to make drivers easier to write and to centralize common
code across drivers.

Before migrating pages to device private memory, special device private
``struct page`` needs to be created. These will be used as special "swap"
page table entries so that a CPU process will fault if it tries to access
a page that has been migrated to device private memory.

These can be allocated and freed with::

    struct resource *res;
    struct dev_pagemap pagemap;

    res = request_free_mem_region(&iomem_resource, /* number of bytes */,
                                  "name of driver resource");
    pagemap.type = MEMORY_DEVICE_PRIVATE;
    pagemap.range.start = res->start;
    pagemap.range.end = res->end;
    pagemap.nr_range = 1;
    pagemap.ops = &device_devmem_ops;
    memremap_pages(&pagemap, numa_node_id());

    memunmap_pages(&pagemap);
    release_mem_region(pagemap.range.start, range_len(&pagemap.range));

There are also devm_request_free_mem_region(), devm_memremap_pages(),
devm_memunmap_pages(), and devm_release_mem_region() when the resources can
be tied to a ``struct device``.

The overall migration steps are similar to migrating NUMA pages within system
memory (see Documentation/mm/page_migration.rst) but the steps are split
between device driver specific code and shared common code:

1. ``mmap_read_lock()``

   The device driver has to pass a ``struct vm_area_struct`` to
   migrate_vma_setup() so the mmap_read_lock() or mmap_write_lock() needs to
   be held for the duration of the migration.

2. ``migrate_vma_setup(struct migrate_vma *args)``

   The device driver initializes the ``struct migrate_vma`` fields and passes
   the pointer to migrate_vma_setup(). The ``args->flags`` field is used to
   filter which source pages should be migrated. For example, setting
   ``MIGRATE_VMA_SELECT_SYSTEM`` will only migrate system memory and
   ``MIGRATE_VMA_SELECT_DEVICE_PRIVATE`` will only migrate pages residing in
   device private memory. If the latter flag is set, the ``args->pgmap_owner``
   field is used to identify device private pages owned by the driver. This
   avoids trying to migrate device private pages residing in other devices.
   Currently only anonymous private VMA ranges can be migrated to or from
   system memory and device private memory.

   One of the first steps migrate_vma_setup() does is to invalidate other
   device's MMUs with the ``mmu_notifier_invalidate_range_start(()`` and
   ``mmu_notifier_invalidate_range_end()`` calls around the page table
   walks to fill in the ``args->src`` array with PFNs to be migrated.
   The ``invalidate_range_start()`` callback is passed a
   ``struct mmu_notifier_range`` with the ``event`` field set to
   ``MMU_NOTIFY_MIGRATE`` and the ``owner`` field set to
   the ``args->pgmap_owner`` field passed to migrate_vma_setup(). This
   allows the device driver to skip the invalidation callback and only
   invalidate device private MMU mappings that are actually migrating.
   This is explained more in the next section.

   While walking the page tables, a ``pte_none()`` or ``is_zero_pfn()``
   entry results in a valid "zero" PFN stored in the ``args->src`` array.
   This lets the driver allocate device private memory and clear it instead
   of copying a page of zeros. Valid PTE entries to system memory or
   device private struct pages will be locked with ``lock_page()``, isolated
   from the LRU (if system memory since device private pages are not on
   the LRU), unmapped from the process, and a special migration PTE is
   inserted in place of the original PTE.
   migrate_vma_setup() also clears the ``args->dst`` array.

3. The device driver allocates destination pages and copies source pages to
   destination pages.

   The driver checks each ``src`` entry to see if the ``MIGRATE_PFN_MIGRATE``
   bit is set and skips entries that are not migrating. The device driver
   can also choose to skip migrating a page by not filling in the ``dst``
   array for that page.

   The driver then allocates either a device private struct page or a
   system memory page, locks the page with ``lock_page()``, and fills in the
   ``dst`` array entry with::

     dst[i] = migrate_pfn(page_to_pfn(dpage));

   Now that the driver knows that this page is being migrated, it can
   invalidate device private MMU mappings and copy device private memory
   to system memory or another device private page. The core Linux kernel
   handles CPU page table invalidations so the device driver only has to
   invalidate its own MMU mappings.

   The driver can use ``migrate_pfn_to_page(src[i])`` to get the
   ``struct page`` of the source and either copy the source page to the
   destination or clear the destination device private memory if the pointer
   is ``NULL`` meaning the source page was not populated in system memory.

4. ``migrate_vma_pages()``

   This step is where the migration is actually "committed".

   If the source page was a ``pte_none()`` or ``is_zero_pfn()`` page, this
   is where the newly allocated page is inserted into the CPU's page table.
   This can fail if a CPU thread faults on the same page. However, the page
   table is locked and only one of the new pages will be inserted.
   The device driver will see that the ``MIGRATE_PFN_MIGRATE`` bit is cleared
   if it loses the race.

   If the source page was locked, isolated, etc. the source ``struct page``
   information is now copied to destination ``struct page`` finalizing the
   migration on the CPU side.

5. Device driver updates device MMU page tables for pages still migrating,
   rolling back pages not migrating.

   If the ``src`` entry still has ``MIGRATE_PFN_MIGRATE`` bit set, the device
   driver can update the device MMU and set the write enable bit if the
   ``MIGRATE_PFN_WRITE`` bit is set.

6. ``migrate_vma_finalize()``

   This step replaces the special migration page table entry with the new
   page's page table entry and releases the reference to the source and
   destination ``struct page``.

7. ``mmap_read_unlock()``

   The lock can now be released.

Exclusive access memory
=======================

Some devices have features such as atomic PTE bits that can be used to implement
atomic access to system memory. To support atomic operations to a shared virtual
memory page such a device needs access to that page which is exclusive of any
userspace access from the CPU. The ``make_device_exclusive_range()`` function
can be used to make a memory range inaccessible from userspace.

This replaces all mappings for pages in the given range with special swap
entries. Any attempt to access the swap entry results in a fault which is
resolved by replacing the entry with the original mapping. A driver gets
notified that the mapping has been changed by MMU notifiers, after which point
it will no longer have exclusive access to the page. Exclusive access is
guaranteed to last until the driver drops the page lock and page reference, at
which point any CPU faults on the page may proceed as described.

Memory cgroup (memcg) and rss accounting
========================================

For now, device memory is accounted as any regular page in rss counters (either
anonymous if device page is used for anonymous, file if device page is used for
file backed page, or shmem if device page is used for shared memory). This is a
deliberate choice to keep existing applications, that might start using device
memory without knowing about it, running unimpacted.

A drawback is that the OOM killer might kill an application using a lot of
device memory and not a lot of regular system memory and thus not freeing much
system memory. We want to gather more real world experience on how applications
and system react under memory pressure in the presence of device memory before
deciding to account device memory differently.


Same decision was made for memory cgroup. Device memory pages are accounted
against same memory cgroup a regular page would be accounted to. This does
simplify migration to and from device memory. This also means that migration
back from device memory to regular memory cannot fail because it would
go above memory cgroup limit. We might revisit this choice later on once we
get more experience in how device memory is used and its impact on memory
resource control.


Note that device memory can never be pinned by a device driver nor through GUP
and thus such memory is always free upon process exit. Or when last reference
is dropped in case of shared memory or file backed memory.
=====================
Hugetlbfs Reservation
=====================

Overview
========

Huge pages as described at Documentation/admin-guide/mm/hugetlbpage.rst are
typically preallocated for application use.  These huge pages are instantiated
in a task's address space at page fault time if the VMA indicates huge pages
are to be used.  If no huge page exists at page fault time, the task is sent
a SIGBUS and often dies an unhappy death.  Shortly after huge page support
was added, it was determined that it would be better to detect a shortage
of huge pages at mmap() time.  The idea is that if there were not enough
huge pages to cover the mapping, the mmap() would fail.  This was first
done with a simple check in the code at mmap() time to determine if there
were enough free huge pages to cover the mapping.  Like most things in the
kernel, the code has evolved over time.  However, the basic idea was to
'reserve' huge pages at mmap() time to ensure that huge pages would be
available for page faults in that mapping.  The description below attempts to
describe how huge page reserve processing is done in the v4.10 kernel.


Audience
========
This description is primarily targeted at kernel developers who are modifying
hugetlbfs code.


The Data Structures
===================

resv_huge_pages
	This is a global (per-hstate) count of reserved huge pages.  Reserved
	huge pages are only available to the task which reserved them.
	Therefore, the number of huge pages generally available is computed
	as (``free_huge_pages - resv_huge_pages``).
Reserve Map
	A reserve map is described by the structure::

		struct resv_map {
			struct kref refs;
			spinlock_t lock;
			struct list_head regions;
			long adds_in_progress;
			struct list_head region_cache;
			long region_cache_count;
		};

	There is one reserve map for each huge page mapping in the system.
	The regions list within the resv_map describes the regions within
	the mapping.  A region is described as::

		struct file_region {
			struct list_head link;
			long from;
			long to;
		};

	The 'from' and 'to' fields of the file region structure are huge page
	indices into the mapping.  Depending on the type of mapping, a
	region in the reserv_map may indicate reservations exist for the
	range, or reservations do not exist.
Flags for MAP_PRIVATE Reservations
	These are stored in the bottom bits of the reservation map pointer.

	``#define HPAGE_RESV_OWNER    (1UL << 0)``
		Indicates this task is the owner of the reservations
		associated with the mapping.
	``#define HPAGE_RESV_UNMAPPED (1UL << 1)``
		Indicates task originally mapping this range (and creating
		reserves) has unmapped a page from this task (the child)
		due to a failed COW.
Page Flags
	The PagePrivate page flag is used to indicate that a huge page
	reservation must be restored when the huge page is freed.  More
	details will be discussed in the "Freeing huge pages" section.


Reservation Map Location (Private or Shared)
============================================

A huge page mapping or segment is either private or shared.  If private,
it is typically only available to a single address space (task).  If shared,
it can be mapped into multiple address spaces (tasks).  The location and
semantics of the reservation map is significantly different for the two types
of mappings.  Location differences are:

- For private mappings, the reservation map hangs off the VMA structure.
  Specifically, vma->vm_private_data.  This reserve map is created at the
  time the mapping (mmap(MAP_PRIVATE)) is created.
- For shared mappings, the reservation map hangs off the inode.  Specifically,
  inode->i_mapping->private_data.  Since shared mappings are always backed
  by files in the hugetlbfs filesystem, the hugetlbfs code ensures each inode
  contains a reservation map.  As a result, the reservation map is allocated
  when the inode is created.


Creating Reservations
=====================
Reservations are created when a huge page backed shared memory segment is
created (shmget(SHM_HUGETLB)) or a mapping is created via mmap(MAP_HUGETLB).
These operations result in a call to the routine hugetlb_reserve_pages()::

	int hugetlb_reserve_pages(struct inode *inode,
				  long from, long to,
				  struct vm_area_struct *vma,
				  vm_flags_t vm_flags)

The first thing hugetlb_reserve_pages() does is check if the NORESERVE
flag was specified in either the shmget() or mmap() call.  If NORESERVE
was specified, then this routine returns immediately as no reservations
are desired.

The arguments 'from' and 'to' are huge page indices into the mapping or
underlying file.  For shmget(), 'from' is always 0 and 'to' corresponds to
the length of the segment/mapping.  For mmap(), the offset argument could
be used to specify the offset into the underlying file.  In such a case,
the 'from' and 'to' arguments have been adjusted by this offset.

One of the big differences between PRIVATE and SHARED mappings is the way
in which reservations are represented in the reservation map.

- For shared mappings, an entry in the reservation map indicates a reservation
  exists or did exist for the corresponding page.  As reservations are
  consumed, the reservation map is not modified.
- For private mappings, the lack of an entry in the reservation map indicates
  a reservation exists for the corresponding page.  As reservations are
  consumed, entries are added to the reservation map.  Therefore, the
  reservation map can also be used to determine which reservations have
  been consumed.

For private mappings, hugetlb_reserve_pages() creates the reservation map and
hangs it off the VMA structure.  In addition, the HPAGE_RESV_OWNER flag is set
to indicate this VMA owns the reservations.

The reservation map is consulted to determine how many huge page reservations
are needed for the current mapping/segment.  For private mappings, this is
always the value (to - from).  However, for shared mappings it is possible that
some reservations may already exist within the range (to - from).  See the
section :ref:`Reservation Map Modifications <resv_map_modifications>`
for details on how this is accomplished.

The mapping may be associated with a subpool.  If so, the subpool is consulted
to ensure there is sufficient space for the mapping.  It is possible that the
subpool has set aside reservations that can be used for the mapping.  See the
section :ref:`Subpool Reservations <sub_pool_resv>` for more details.

After consulting the reservation map and subpool, the number of needed new
reservations is known.  The routine hugetlb_acct_memory() is called to check
for and take the requested number of reservations.  hugetlb_acct_memory()
calls into routines that potentially allocate and adjust surplus page counts.
However, within those routines the code is simply checking to ensure there
are enough free huge pages to accommodate the reservation.  If there are,
the global reservation count resv_huge_pages is adjusted something like the
following::

	if (resv_needed <= (resv_huge_pages - free_huge_pages))
		resv_huge_pages += resv_needed;

Note that the global lock hugetlb_lock is held when checking and adjusting
these counters.

If there were enough free huge pages and the global count resv_huge_pages
was adjusted, then the reservation map associated with the mapping is
modified to reflect the reservations.  In the case of a shared mapping, a
file_region will exist that includes the range 'from' - 'to'.  For private
mappings, no modifications are made to the reservation map as lack of an
entry indicates a reservation exists.

If hugetlb_reserve_pages() was successful, the global reservation count and
reservation map associated with the mapping will be modified as required to
ensure reservations exist for the range 'from' - 'to'.

.. _consume_resv:

Consuming Reservations/Allocating a Huge Page
=============================================

Reservations are consumed when huge pages associated with the reservations
are allocated and instantiated in the corresponding mapping.  The allocation
is performed within the routine alloc_hugetlb_folio()::

	struct folio *alloc_hugetlb_folio(struct vm_area_struct *vma,
				     unsigned long addr, int avoid_reserve)

alloc_hugetlb_folio is passed a VMA pointer and a virtual address, so it can
consult the reservation map to determine if a reservation exists.  In addition,
alloc_hugetlb_folio takes the argument avoid_reserve which indicates reserves
should not be used even if it appears they have been set aside for the
specified address.  The avoid_reserve argument is most often used in the case
of Copy on Write and Page Migration where additional copies of an existing
page are being allocated.

The helper routine vma_needs_reservation() is called to determine if a
reservation exists for the address within the mapping(vma).  See the section
:ref:`Reservation Map Helper Routines <resv_map_helpers>` for detailed
information on what this routine does.
The value returned from vma_needs_reservation() is generally
0 or 1.  0 if a reservation exists for the address, 1 if no reservation exists.
If a reservation does not exist, and there is a subpool associated with the
mapping the subpool is consulted to determine if it contains reservations.
If the subpool contains reservations, one can be used for this allocation.
However, in every case the avoid_reserve argument overrides the use of
a reservation for the allocation.  After determining whether a reservation
exists and can be used for the allocation, the routine dequeue_huge_page_vma()
is called.  This routine takes two arguments related to reservations:

- avoid_reserve, this is the same value/argument passed to
  alloc_hugetlb_folio().
- chg, even though this argument is of type long only the values 0 or 1 are
  passed to dequeue_huge_page_vma.  If the value is 0, it indicates a
  reservation exists (see the section "Memory Policy and Reservations" for
  possible issues).  If the value is 1, it indicates a reservation does not
  exist and the page must be taken from the global free pool if possible.

The free lists associated with the memory policy of the VMA are searched for
a free page.  If a page is found, the value free_huge_pages is decremented
when the page is removed from the free list.  If there was a reservation
associated with the page, the following adjustments are made::

	SetPagePrivate(page);	/* Indicates allocating this page consumed
				 * a reservation, and if an error is
				 * encountered such that the page must be
				 * freed, the reservation will be restored. */
	resv_huge_pages--;	/* Decrement the global reservation count */

Note, if no huge page can be found that satisfies the VMA's memory policy
an attempt will be made to allocate one using the buddy allocator.  This
brings up the issue of surplus huge pages and overcommit which is beyond
the scope reservations.  Even if a surplus page is allocated, the same
reservation based adjustments as above will be made: SetPagePrivate(page) and
resv_huge_pages--.

After obtaining a new hugetlb folio, (folio)->_hugetlb_subpool is set to the
value of the subpool associated with the page if it exists.  This will be used
for subpool accounting when the folio is freed.

The routine vma_commit_reservation() is then called to adjust the reserve
map based on the consumption of the reservation.  In general, this involves
ensuring the page is represented within a file_region structure of the region
map.  For shared mappings where the reservation was present, an entry
in the reserve map already existed so no change is made.  However, if there
was no reservation in a shared mapping or this was a private mapping a new
entry must be created.

It is possible that the reserve map could have been changed between the call
to vma_needs_reservation() at the beginning of alloc_hugetlb_folio() and the
call to vma_commit_reservation() after the folio was allocated.  This would
be possible if hugetlb_reserve_pages was called for the same page in a shared
mapping.  In such cases, the reservation count and subpool free page count
will be off by one.  This rare condition can be identified by comparing the
return value from vma_needs_reservation and vma_commit_reservation.  If such
a race is detected, the subpool and global reserve counts are adjusted to
compensate.  See the section
:ref:`Reservation Map Helper Routines <resv_map_helpers>` for more
information on these routines.


Instantiate Huge Pages
======================

After huge page allocation, the page is typically added to the page tables
of the allocating task.  Before this, pages in a shared mapping are added
to the page cache and pages in private mappings are added to an anonymous
reverse mapping.  In both cases, the PagePrivate flag is cleared.  Therefore,
when a huge page that has been instantiated is freed no adjustment is made
to the global reservation count (resv_huge_pages).


Freeing Huge Pages
==================

Huge pages are freed by free_huge_folio().  It is only passed a pointer
to the folio as it is called from the generic MM code.  When a huge page
is freed, reservation accounting may need to be performed.  This would
be the case if the page was associated with a subpool that contained
reserves, or the page is being freed on an error path where a global
reserve count must be restored.

The page->private field points to any subpool associated with the page.
If the PagePrivate flag is set, it indicates the global reserve count should
be adjusted (see the section
:ref:`Consuming Reservations/Allocating a Huge Page <consume_resv>`
for information on how these are set).

The routine first calls hugepage_subpool_put_pages() for the page.  If this
routine returns a value of 0 (which does not equal the value passed 1) it
indicates reserves are associated with the subpool, and this newly free page
must be used to keep the number of subpool reserves above the minimum size.
Therefore, the global resv_huge_pages counter is incremented in this case.

If the PagePrivate flag was set in the page, the global resv_huge_pages counter
will always be incremented.

.. _sub_pool_resv:

Subpool Reservations
====================

There is a struct hstate associated with each huge page size.  The hstate
tracks all huge pages of the specified size.  A subpool represents a subset
of pages within a hstate that is associated with a mounted hugetlbfs
filesystem.

When a hugetlbfs filesystem is mounted a min_size option can be specified
which indicates the minimum number of huge pages required by the filesystem.
If this option is specified, the number of huge pages corresponding to
min_size are reserved for use by the filesystem.  This number is tracked in
the min_hpages field of a struct hugepage_subpool.  At mount time,
hugetlb_acct_memory(min_hpages) is called to reserve the specified number of
huge pages.  If they can not be reserved, the mount fails.

The routines hugepage_subpool_get/put_pages() are called when pages are
obtained from or released back to a subpool.  They perform all subpool
accounting, and track any reservations associated with the subpool.
hugepage_subpool_get/put_pages are passed the number of huge pages by which
to adjust the subpool 'used page' count (down for get, up for put).  Normally,
they return the same value that was passed or an error if not enough pages
exist in the subpool.

However, if reserves are associated with the subpool a return value less
than the passed value may be returned.  This return value indicates the
number of additional global pool adjustments which must be made.  For example,
suppose a subpool contains 3 reserved huge pages and someone asks for 5.
The 3 reserved pages associated with the subpool can be used to satisfy part
of the request.  But, 2 pages must be obtained from the global pools.  To
relay this information to the caller, the value 2 is returned.  The caller
is then responsible for attempting to obtain the additional two pages from
the global pools.


COW and Reservations
====================

Since shared mappings all point to and use the same underlying pages, the
biggest reservation concern for COW is private mappings.  In this case,
two tasks can be pointing at the same previously allocated page.  One task
attempts to write to the page, so a new page must be allocated so that each
task points to its own page.

When the page was originally allocated, the reservation for that page was
consumed.  When an attempt to allocate a new page is made as a result of
COW, it is possible that no free huge pages are free and the allocation
will fail.

When the private mapping was originally created, the owner of the mapping
was noted by setting the HPAGE_RESV_OWNER bit in the pointer to the reservation
map of the owner.  Since the owner created the mapping, the owner owns all
the reservations associated with the mapping.  Therefore, when a write fault
occurs and there is no page available, different action is taken for the owner
and non-owner of the reservation.

In the case where the faulting task is not the owner, the fault will fail and
the task will typically receive a SIGBUS.

If the owner is the faulting task, we want it to succeed since it owned the
original reservation.  To accomplish this, the page is unmapped from the
non-owning task.  In this way, the only reference is from the owning task.
In addition, the HPAGE_RESV_UNMAPPED bit is set in the reservation map pointer
of the non-owning task.  The non-owning task may receive a SIGBUS if it later
faults on a non-present page.  But, the original owner of the
mapping/reservation will behave as expected.


.. _resv_map_modifications:

Reservation Map Modifications
=============================

The following low level routines are used to make modifications to a
reservation map.  Typically, these routines are not called directly.  Rather,
a reservation map helper routine is called which calls one of these low level
routines.  These low level routines are fairly well documented in the source
code (mm/hugetlb.c).  These routines are::

	long region_chg(struct resv_map *resv, long f, long t);
	long region_add(struct resv_map *resv, long f, long t);
	void region_abort(struct resv_map *resv, long f, long t);
	long region_count(struct resv_map *resv, long f, long t);

Operations on the reservation map typically involve two operations:

1) region_chg() is called to examine the reserve map and determine how
   many pages in the specified range [f, t) are NOT currently represented.

   The calling code performs global checks and allocations to determine if
   there are enough huge pages for the operation to succeed.

2)
  a) If the operation can succeed, region_add() is called to actually modify
     the reservation map for the same range [f, t) previously passed to
     region_chg().
  b) If the operation can not succeed, region_abort is called for the same
     range [f, t) to abort the operation.

Note that this is a two step process where region_add() and region_abort()
are guaranteed to succeed after a prior call to region_chg() for the same
range.  region_chg() is responsible for pre-allocating any data structures
necessary to ensure the subsequent operations (specifically region_add()))
will succeed.

As mentioned above, region_chg() determines the number of pages in the range
which are NOT currently represented in the map.  This number is returned to
the caller.  region_add() returns the number of pages in the range added to
the map.  In most cases, the return value of region_add() is the same as the
return value of region_chg().  However, in the case of shared mappings it is
possible for changes to the reservation map to be made between the calls to
region_chg() and region_add().  In this case, the return value of region_add()
will not match the return value of region_chg().  It is likely that in such
cases global counts and subpool accounting will be incorrect and in need of
adjustment.  It is the responsibility of the caller to check for this condition
and make the appropriate adjustments.

The routine region_del() is called to remove regions from a reservation map.
It is typically called in the following situations:

- When a file in the hugetlbfs filesystem is being removed, the inode will
  be released and the reservation map freed.  Before freeing the reservation
  map, all the individual file_region structures must be freed.  In this case
  region_del is passed the range [0, LONG_MAX).
- When a hugetlbfs file is being truncated.  In this case, all allocated pages
  after the new file size must be freed.  In addition, any file_region entries
  in the reservation map past the new end of file must be deleted.  In this
  case, region_del is passed the range [new_end_of_file, LONG_MAX).
- When a hole is being punched in a hugetlbfs file.  In this case, huge pages
  are removed from the middle of the file one at a time.  As the pages are
  removed, region_del() is called to remove the corresponding entry from the
  reservation map.  In this case, region_del is passed the range
  [page_idx, page_idx + 1).

In every case, region_del() will return the number of pages removed from the
reservation map.  In VERY rare cases, region_del() can fail.  This can only
happen in the hole punch case where it has to split an existing file_region
entry and can not allocate a new structure.  In this error case, region_del()
will return -ENOMEM.  The problem here is that the reservation map will
indicate that there is a reservation for the page.  However, the subpool and
global reservation counts will not reflect the reservation.  To handle this
situation, the routine hugetlb_fix_reserve_counts() is called to adjust the
counters so that they correspond with the reservation map entry that could
not be deleted.

region_count() is called when unmapping a private huge page mapping.  In
private mappings, the lack of a entry in the reservation map indicates that
a reservation exists.  Therefore, by counting the number of entries in the
reservation map we know how many reservations were consumed and how many are
outstanding (outstanding = (end - start) - region_count(resv, start, end)).
Since the mapping is going away, the subpool and global reservation counts
are decremented by the number of outstanding reservations.

.. _resv_map_helpers:

Reservation Map Helper Routines
===============================

Several helper routines exist to query and modify the reservation maps.
These routines are only interested with reservations for a specific huge
page, so they just pass in an address instead of a range.  In addition,
they pass in the associated VMA.  From the VMA, the type of mapping (private
or shared) and the location of the reservation map (inode or VMA) can be
determined.  These routines simply call the underlying routines described
in the section "Reservation Map Modifications".  However, they do take into
account the 'opposite' meaning of reservation map entries for private and
shared mappings and hide this detail from the caller::

	long vma_needs_reservation(struct hstate *h,
				   struct vm_area_struct *vma,
				   unsigned long addr)

This routine calls region_chg() for the specified page.  If no reservation
exists, 1 is returned.  If a reservation exists, 0 is returned::

	long vma_commit_reservation(struct hstate *h,
				    struct vm_area_struct *vma,
				    unsigned long addr)

This calls region_add() for the specified page.  As in the case of region_chg
and region_add, this routine is to be called after a previous call to
vma_needs_reservation.  It will add a reservation entry for the page.  It
returns 1 if the reservation was added and 0 if not.  The return value should
be compared with the return value of the previous call to
vma_needs_reservation.  An unexpected difference indicates the reservation
map was modified between calls::

	void vma_end_reservation(struct hstate *h,
				 struct vm_area_struct *vma,
				 unsigned long addr)

This calls region_abort() for the specified page.  As in the case of region_chg
and region_abort, this routine is to be called after a previous call to
vma_needs_reservation.  It will abort/end the in progress reservation add
operation::

	long vma_add_reservation(struct hstate *h,
				 struct vm_area_struct *vma,
				 unsigned long addr)

This is a special wrapper routine to help facilitate reservation cleanup
on error paths.  It is only called from the routine restore_reserve_on_error().
This routine is used in conjunction with vma_needs_reservation in an attempt
to add a reservation to the reservation map.  It takes into account the
different reservation map semantics for private and shared mappings.  Hence,
region_add is called for shared mappings (as an entry present in the map
indicates a reservation), and region_del is called for private mappings (as
the absence of an entry in the map indicates a reservation).  See the section
"Reservation cleanup in error paths" for more information on what needs to
be done on error paths.


Reservation Cleanup in Error Paths
==================================

As mentioned in the section
:ref:`Reservation Map Helper Routines <resv_map_helpers>`, reservation
map modifications are performed in two steps.  First vma_needs_reservation
is called before a page is allocated.  If the allocation is successful,
then vma_commit_reservation is called.  If not, vma_end_reservation is called.
Global and subpool reservation counts are adjusted based on success or failure
of the operation and all is well.

Additionally, after a huge page is instantiated the PagePrivate flag is
cleared so that accounting when the page is ultimately freed is correct.

However, there are several instances where errors are encountered after a huge
page is allocated but before it is instantiated.  In this case, the page
allocation has consumed the reservation and made the appropriate subpool,
reservation map and global count adjustments.  If the page is freed at this
time (before instantiation and clearing of PagePrivate), then free_huge_folio
will increment the global reservation count.  However, the reservation map
indicates the reservation was consumed.  This resulting inconsistent state
will cause the 'leak' of a reserved huge page.  The global reserve count will
be  higher than it should and prevent allocation of a pre-allocated page.

The routine restore_reserve_on_error() attempts to handle this situation.  It
is fairly well documented.  The intention of this routine is to restore
the reservation map to the way it was before the page allocation.   In this
way, the state of the reservation map will correspond to the global reservation
count after the page is freed.

The routine restore_reserve_on_error itself may encounter errors while
attempting to restore the reservation map entry.  In this case, it will
simply clear the PagePrivate flag of the page.  In this way, the global
reserve count will not be incremented when the page is freed.  However, the
reservation map will continue to look as though the reservation was consumed.
A page can still be allocated for the address, but it will not use a reserved
page as originally intended.

There is some code (most notably userfaultfd) which can not call
restore_reserve_on_error.  In this case, it simply modifies the PagePrivate
so that a reservation will not be leaked when the huge page is freed.


Reservations and Memory Policy
==============================
Per-node huge page lists existed in struct hstate when git was first used
to manage Linux code.  The concept of reservations was added some time later.
When reservations were added, no attempt was made to take memory policy
into account.  While cpusets are not exactly the same as memory policy, this
comment in hugetlb_acct_memory sums up the interaction between reservations
and cpusets/memory policy::

	/*
	 * When cpuset is configured, it breaks the strict hugetlb page
	 * reservation as the accounting is done on a global variable. Such
	 * reservation is completely rubbish in the presence of cpuset because
	 * the reservation is not checked against page availability for the
	 * current cpuset. Application can still potentially OOM'ed by kernel
	 * with lack of free htlb page in cpuset that the task is in.
	 * Attempt to enforce strict accounting with cpuset is almost
	 * impossible (or too ugly) because cpuset is too fluid that
	 * task or memory node can be dynamically moved between cpusets.
	 *
	 * The change of semantics for shared hugetlb mapping with cpuset is
	 * undesirable. However, in order to preserve some of the semantics,
	 * we fall back to check against current free page availability as
	 * a best attempt and hopefully to minimize the impact of changing
	 * semantics that cpuset has.
	 */

Huge page reservations were added to prevent unexpected page allocation
failures (OOM) at page fault time.  However, if an application makes use
of cpusets or memory policy there is no guarantee that huge pages will be
available on the required nodes.  This is true even if there are a sufficient
number of global reservations.

Hugetlbfs regression testing
============================

The most complete set of hugetlb tests are in the libhugetlbfs repository.
If you modify any hugetlb related code, use the libhugetlbfs test suite
to check for regressions.  In addition, if you add any new hugetlb
functionality, please add appropriate tests to libhugetlbfs.

--
Mike Kravetz, 7 April 2017
========
hwpoison
========

What is hwpoison?
=================

Upcoming Intel CPUs have support for recovering from some memory errors
(``MCA recovery``). This requires the OS to declare a page "poisoned",
kill the processes associated with it and avoid using it in the future.

This patchkit implements the necessary infrastructure in the VM.

To quote the overview comment::

	High level machine check handler. Handles pages reported by the
	hardware as being corrupted usually due to a 2bit ECC memory or cache
	failure.

	This focusses on pages detected as corrupted in the background.
	When the current CPU tries to consume corruption the currently
	running process can just be killed directly instead. This implies
	that if the error cannot be handled for some reason it's safe to
	just ignore it because no corruption has been consumed yet. Instead
	when that happens another machine check will happen.

	Handles page cache pages in various states. The tricky part
	here is that we can access any page asynchronous to other VM
	users, because memory failures could happen anytime and anywhere,
	possibly violating some of their assumptions. This is why this code
	has to be extremely careful. Generally it tries to use normal locking
	rules, as in get the standard locks, even if that means the
	error handling takes potentially a long time.

	Some of the operations here are somewhat inefficient and have non
	linear algorithmic complexity, because the data structures have not
	been optimized for this case. This is in particular the case
	for the mapping from a vma to a process. Since this case is expected
	to be rare we hope we can get away with this.

The code consists of a the high level handler in mm/memory-failure.c,
a new page poison bit and various checks in the VM to handle poisoned
pages.

The main target right now is KVM guests, but it works for all kinds
of applications. KVM support requires a recent qemu-kvm release.

For the KVM use there was need for a new signal type so that
KVM can inject the machine check into the guest with the proper
address. This in theory allows other applications to handle
memory failures too. The expectation is that most applications
won't do that, but some very specialized ones might.

Failure recovery modes
======================

There are two (actually three) modes memory failure recovery can be in:

vm.memory_failure_recovery sysctl set to zero:
	All memory failures cause a panic. Do not attempt recovery.

early kill
	(can be controlled globally and per process)
	Send SIGBUS to the application as soon as the error is detected
	This allows applications who can process memory errors in a gentle
	way (e.g. drop affected object)
	This is the mode used by KVM qemu.

late kill
	Send SIGBUS when the application runs into the corrupted page.
	This is best for memory error unaware applications and default
	Note some pages are always handled as late kill.

User control
============

vm.memory_failure_recovery
	See sysctl.txt

vm.memory_failure_early_kill
	Enable early kill mode globally

PR_MCE_KILL
	Set early/late kill mode/revert to system default

	arg1: PR_MCE_KILL_CLEAR:
		Revert to system default
	arg1: PR_MCE_KILL_SET:
		arg2 defines thread specific mode

		PR_MCE_KILL_EARLY:
			Early kill
		PR_MCE_KILL_LATE:
			Late kill
		PR_MCE_KILL_DEFAULT
			Use system global default

	Note that if you want to have a dedicated thread which handles
	the SIGBUS(BUS_MCEERR_AO) on behalf of the process, you should
	call prctl(PR_MCE_KILL_EARLY) on the designated thread. Otherwise,
	the SIGBUS is sent to the main thread.

PR_MCE_KILL_GET
	return current mode

Testing
=======

* madvise(MADV_HWPOISON, ....) (as root) - Poison a page in the
  process for testing

* hwpoison-inject module through debugfs ``/sys/kernel/debug/hwpoison/``

  corrupt-pfn
	Inject hwpoison fault at PFN echoed into this file. This does
	some early filtering to avoid corrupted unintended pages in test suites.

  unpoison-pfn
	Software-unpoison page at PFN echoed into this file. This way
	a page can be reused again.  This only works for Linux
	injected failures, not for real memory failures. Once any hardware
	memory failure happens, this feature is disabled.

  Note these injection interfaces are not stable and might change between
  kernel versions

  corrupt-filter-dev-major, corrupt-filter-dev-minor
	Only handle memory failures to pages associated with the file
	system defined by block device major/minor.  -1U is the
	wildcard value.  This should be only used for testing with
	artificial injection.

  corrupt-filter-memcg
	Limit injection to pages owned by memgroup. Specified by inode
	number of the memcg.

	Example::

		mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/mem/hwpoison

	        usemem -m 100 -s 1000 &
		echo `jobs -p` > /sys/fs/cgroup/mem/hwpoison/tasks

		memcg_ino=$(ls -id /sys/fs/cgroup/mem/hwpoison | cut -f1 -d' ')
		echo $memcg_ino > /debug/hwpoison/corrupt-filter-memcg

		page-types -p `pidof init`   --hwpoison  # shall do nothing
		page-types -p `pidof usemem` --hwpoison  # poison its pages

  corrupt-filter-flags-mask, corrupt-filter-flags-value
	When specified, only poison pages if ((page_flags & mask) ==
	value).  This allows stress testing of many kinds of
	pages. The page_flags are the same as in /proc/kpageflags. The
	flag bits are defined in include/linux/kernel-page-flags.h and
	documented in Documentation/admin-guide/mm/pagemap.rst

* Architecture specific MCE injector

  x86 has mce-inject, mce-test

  Some portable hwpoison test programs in mce-test, see below.

References
==========

http://halobates.de/mce-lc09-2.pdf
	Overview presentation from LinuxCon 09

git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/utils/cpu/mce/mce-test.git
	Test suite (hwpoison specific portable tests in tsrc)

git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/utils/cpu/mce/mce-inject.git
	x86 specific injector


Limitations
===========
- Not all page types are supported and never will. Most kernel internal
  objects cannot be recovered, only LRU pages for now.

---
Andi Kleen, Oct 2009
===============================
Memory Management Documentation
===============================

This is a guide to understanding the memory management subsystem
of Linux.  If you are looking for advice on simply allocating memory,
see the :ref:`memory_allocation`.  For controlling and tuning guides,
see the :doc:`admin guide <../admin-guide/mm/index>`.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   physical_memory
   page_tables
   process_addrs
   bootmem
   page_allocation
   vmalloc
   slab
   highmem
   page_reclaim
   swap
   page_cache
   shmfs
   oom

Unsorted Documentation
======================

This is a collection of unsorted documents about the Linux memory management
(MM) subsystem internals with different level of details ranging from notes and
mailing list responses for elaborating descriptions of data structures and
algorithms.  It should all be integrated nicely into the above structured
documentation, or deleted if it has served its purpose.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   active_mm
   allocation-profiling
   arch_pgtable_helpers
   balance
   damon/index
   free_page_reporting
   hmm
   hwpoison
   hugetlbfs_reserv
   ksm
   memory-model
   mmu_notifier
   multigen_lru
   numa
   overcommit-accounting
   page_migration
   page_frags
   page_owner
   page_table_check
   remap_file_pages
   slub
   split_page_table_lock
   transhuge
   unevictable-lru
   vmalloced-kernel-stacks
   vmemmap_dedup
   z3fold
   zsmalloc
=======================
Kernel Samepage Merging
=======================

KSM is a memory-saving de-duplication feature, enabled by CONFIG_KSM=y,
added to the Linux kernel in 2.6.32.  See ``mm/ksm.c`` for its implementation,
and http://lwn.net/Articles/306704/ and https://lwn.net/Articles/330589/

The userspace interface of KSM is described in Documentation/admin-guide/mm/ksm.rst

Design
======

Overview
--------

.. kernel-doc:: mm/ksm.c
   :DOC: Overview

Reverse mapping
---------------
KSM maintains reverse mapping information for KSM pages in the stable
tree.

If a KSM page is shared between less than ``max_page_sharing`` VMAs,
the node of the stable tree that represents such KSM page points to a
list of struct ksm_rmap_item and the ``page->mapping`` of the
KSM page points to the stable tree node.

When the sharing passes this threshold, KSM adds a second dimension to
the stable tree. The tree node becomes a "chain" that links one or
more "dups". Each "dup" keeps reverse mapping information for a KSM
page with ``page->mapping`` pointing to that "dup".

Every "chain" and all "dups" linked into a "chain" enforce the
invariant that they represent the same write protected memory content,
even if each "dup" will be pointed by a different KSM page copy of
that content.

This way the stable tree lookup computational complexity is unaffected
if compared to an unlimited list of reverse mappings. It is still
enforced that there cannot be KSM page content duplicates in the
stable tree itself.

The deduplication limit enforced by ``max_page_sharing`` is required
to avoid the virtual memory rmap lists to grow too large. The rmap
walk has O(N) complexity where N is the number of rmap_items
(i.e. virtual mappings) that are sharing the page, which is in turn
capped by ``max_page_sharing``. So this effectively spreads the linear
O(N) computational complexity from rmap walk context over different
KSM pages. The ksmd walk over the stable_node "chains" is also O(N),
but N is the number of stable_node "dups", not the number of
rmap_items, so it has not a significant impact on ksmd performance. In
practice the best stable_node "dup" candidate will be kept and found
at the head of the "dups" list.

High values of ``max_page_sharing`` result in faster memory merging
(because there will be fewer stable_node dups queued into the
stable_node chain->hlist to check for pruning) and higher
deduplication factor at the expense of slower worst case for rmap
walks for any KSM page which can happen during swapping, compaction,
NUMA balancing and page migration.

The ``stable_node_dups/stable_node_chains`` ratio is also affected by the
``max_page_sharing`` tunable, and an high ratio may indicate fragmentation
in the stable_node dups, which could be solved by introducing
fragmentation algorithms in ksmd which would refile rmap_items from
one stable_node dup to another stable_node dup, in order to free up
stable_node "dups" with few rmap_items in them, but that may increase
the ksmd CPU usage and possibly slowdown the readonly computations on
the KSM pages of the applications.

The whole list of stable_node "dups" linked in the stable_node
"chains" is scanned periodically in order to prune stale stable_nodes.
The frequency of such scans is defined by
``stable_node_chains_prune_millisecs`` sysfs tunable.

Reference
---------
.. kernel-doc:: mm/ksm.c
   :functions: mm_slot ksm_scan stable_node rmap_item

--
Izik Eidus,
Hugh Dickins, 17 Nov 2009
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=====================
Physical Memory Model
=====================

Physical memory in a system may be addressed in different ways. The
simplest case is when the physical memory starts at address 0 and
spans a contiguous range up to the maximal address. It could be,
however, that this range contains small holes that are not accessible
for the CPU. Then there could be several contiguous ranges at
completely distinct addresses. And, don't forget about NUMA, where
different memory banks are attached to different CPUs.

Linux abstracts this diversity using one of the two memory models:
FLATMEM and SPARSEMEM. Each architecture defines what
memory models it supports, what the default memory model is and
whether it is possible to manually override that default.

All the memory models track the status of physical page frames using
struct page arranged in one or more arrays.

Regardless of the selected memory model, there exists one-to-one
mapping between the physical page frame number (PFN) and the
corresponding `struct page`.

Each memory model defines :c:func:`pfn_to_page` and :c:func:`page_to_pfn`
helpers that allow the conversion from PFN to `struct page` and vice
versa.

FLATMEM
=======

The simplest memory model is FLATMEM. This model is suitable for
non-NUMA systems with contiguous, or mostly contiguous, physical
memory.

In the FLATMEM memory model, there is a global `mem_map` array that
maps the entire physical memory. For most architectures, the holes
have entries in the `mem_map` array. The `struct page` objects
corresponding to the holes are never fully initialized.

To allocate the `mem_map` array, architecture specific setup code should
call :c:func:`free_area_init` function. Yet, the mappings array is not
usable until the call to :c:func:`memblock_free_all` that hands all the
memory to the page allocator.

An architecture may free parts of the `mem_map` array that do not cover the
actual physical pages. In such case, the architecture specific
:c:func:`pfn_valid` implementation should take the holes in the
`mem_map` into account.

With FLATMEM, the conversion between a PFN and the `struct page` is
straightforward: `PFN - ARCH_PFN_OFFSET` is an index to the
`mem_map` array.

The `ARCH_PFN_OFFSET` defines the first page frame number for
systems with physical memory starting at address different from 0.

SPARSEMEM
=========

SPARSEMEM is the most versatile memory model available in Linux and it
is the only memory model that supports several advanced features such
as hot-plug and hot-remove of the physical memory, alternative memory
maps for non-volatile memory devices and deferred initialization of
the memory map for larger systems.

The SPARSEMEM model presents the physical memory as a collection of
sections. A section is represented with struct mem_section
that contains `section_mem_map` that is, logically, a pointer to an
array of struct pages. However, it is stored with some other magic
that aids the sections management. The section size and maximal number
of section is specified using `SECTION_SIZE_BITS` and
`MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS` constants defined by each architecture that
supports SPARSEMEM. While `MAX_PHYSMEM_BITS` is an actual width of a
physical address that an architecture supports, the
`SECTION_SIZE_BITS` is an arbitrary value.

The maximal number of sections is denoted `NR_MEM_SECTIONS` and
defined as

.. math::

   NR\_MEM\_SECTIONS = 2 ^ {(MAX\_PHYSMEM\_BITS - SECTION\_SIZE\_BITS)}

The `mem_section` objects are arranged in a two-dimensional array
called `mem_sections`. The size and placement of this array depend
on `CONFIG_SPARSEMEM_EXTREME` and the maximal possible number of
sections:

* When `CONFIG_SPARSEMEM_EXTREME` is disabled, the `mem_sections`
  array is static and has `NR_MEM_SECTIONS` rows. Each row holds a
  single `mem_section` object.
* When `CONFIG_SPARSEMEM_EXTREME` is enabled, the `mem_sections`
  array is dynamically allocated. Each row contains PAGE_SIZE worth of
  `mem_section` objects and the number of rows is calculated to fit
  all the memory sections.

The architecture setup code should call sparse_init() to
initialize the memory sections and the memory maps.

With SPARSEMEM there are two possible ways to convert a PFN to the
corresponding `struct page` - a "classic sparse" and "sparse
vmemmap". The selection is made at build time and it is determined by
the value of `CONFIG_SPARSEMEM_VMEMMAP`.

The classic sparse encodes the section number of a page in page->flags
and uses high bits of a PFN to access the section that maps that page
frame. Inside a section, the PFN is the index to the array of pages.

The sparse vmemmap uses a virtually mapped memory map to optimize
pfn_to_page and page_to_pfn operations. There is a global `struct
page *vmemmap` pointer that points to a virtually contiguous array of
`struct page` objects. A PFN is an index to that array and the
offset of the `struct page` from `vmemmap` is the PFN of that
page.

To use vmemmap, an architecture has to reserve a range of virtual
addresses that will map the physical pages containing the memory
map and make sure that `vmemmap` points to that range. In addition,
the architecture should implement :c:func:`vmemmap_populate` method
that will allocate the physical memory and create page tables for the
virtual memory map. If an architecture does not have any special
requirements for the vmemmap mappings, it can use default
:c:func:`vmemmap_populate_basepages` provided by the generic memory
management.

The virtually mapped memory map allows storing `struct page` objects
for persistent memory devices in pre-allocated storage on those
devices. This storage is represented with struct vmem_altmap
that is eventually passed to vmemmap_populate() through a long chain
of function calls. The vmemmap_populate() implementation may use the
`vmem_altmap` along with :c:func:`vmemmap_alloc_block_buf` helper to
allocate memory map on the persistent memory device.

ZONE_DEVICE
===========
The `ZONE_DEVICE` facility builds upon `SPARSEMEM_VMEMMAP` to offer
`struct page` `mem_map` services for device driver identified physical
address ranges. The "device" aspect of `ZONE_DEVICE` relates to the fact
that the page objects for these address ranges are never marked online,
and that a reference must be taken against the device, not just the page
to keep the memory pinned for active use. `ZONE_DEVICE`, via
:c:func:`devm_memremap_pages`, performs just enough memory hotplug to
turn on :c:func:`pfn_to_page`, :c:func:`page_to_pfn`, and
:c:func:`get_user_pages` service for the given range of pfns. Since the
page reference count never drops below 1 the page is never tracked as
free memory and the page's `struct list_head lru` space is repurposed
for back referencing to the host device / driver that mapped the memory.

While `SPARSEMEM` presents memory as a collection of sections,
optionally collected into memory blocks, `ZONE_DEVICE` users have a need
for smaller granularity of populating the `mem_map`. Given that
`ZONE_DEVICE` memory is never marked online it is subsequently never
subject to its memory ranges being exposed through the sysfs memory
hotplug api on memory block boundaries. The implementation relies on
this lack of user-api constraint to allow sub-section sized memory
ranges to be specified to :c:func:`arch_add_memory`, the top-half of
memory hotplug. Sub-section support allows for 2MB as the cross-arch
common alignment granularity for :c:func:`devm_memremap_pages`.

The users of `ZONE_DEVICE` are:

* pmem: Map platform persistent memory to be used as a direct-I/O target
  via DAX mappings.

* hmm: Extend `ZONE_DEVICE` with `->page_fault()` and `->page_free()`
  event callbacks to allow a device-driver to coordinate memory management
  events related to device-memory, typically GPU memory. See
  Documentation/mm/hmm.rst.

* p2pdma: Create `struct page` objects to allow peer devices in a
  PCI/-E topology to coordinate direct-DMA operations between themselves,
  i.e. bypass host memory.
When do you need to notify inside page table lock ?
===================================================

When clearing a pte/pmd we are given a choice to notify the event through
(notify version of \*_clear_flush call mmu_notifier_invalidate_range) under
the page table lock. But that notification is not necessary in all cases.

For secondary TLB (non CPU TLB) like IOMMU TLB or device TLB (when device use
thing like ATS/PASID to get the IOMMU to walk the CPU page table to access a
process virtual address space). There is only 2 cases when you need to notify
those secondary TLB while holding page table lock when clearing a pte/pmd:

  A) page backing address is free before mmu_notifier_invalidate_range_end()
  B) a page table entry is updated to point to a new page (COW, write fault
     on zero page, __replace_page(), ...)

Case A is obvious you do not want to take the risk for the device to write to
a page that might now be used by some completely different task.

Case B is more subtle. For correctness it requires the following sequence to
happen:

  - take page table lock
  - clear page table entry and notify ([pmd/pte]p_huge_clear_flush_notify())
  - set page table entry to point to new page

If clearing the page table entry is not followed by a notify before setting
the new pte/pmd value then you can break memory model like C11 or C++11 for
the device.

Consider the following scenario (device use a feature similar to ATS/PASID):

Two address addrA and addrB such that \|addrA - addrB\| >= PAGE_SIZE we assume
they are write protected for COW (other case of B apply too).

::

 [Time N] --------------------------------------------------------------------
 CPU-thread-0  {try to write to addrA}
 CPU-thread-1  {try to write to addrB}
 CPU-thread-2  {}
 CPU-thread-3  {}
 DEV-thread-0  {read addrA and populate device TLB}
 DEV-thread-2  {read addrB and populate device TLB}
 [Time N+1] ------------------------------------------------------------------
 CPU-thread-0  {COW_step0: {mmu_notifier_invalidate_range_start(addrA)}}
 CPU-thread-1  {COW_step0: {mmu_notifier_invalidate_range_start(addrB)}}
 CPU-thread-2  {}
 CPU-thread-3  {}
 DEV-thread-0  {}
 DEV-thread-2  {}
 [Time N+2] ------------------------------------------------------------------
 CPU-thread-0  {COW_step1: {update page table to point to new page for addrA}}
 CPU-thread-1  {COW_step1: {update page table to point to new page for addrB}}
 CPU-thread-2  {}
 CPU-thread-3  {}
 DEV-thread-0  {}
 DEV-thread-2  {}
 [Time N+3] ------------------------------------------------------------------
 CPU-thread-0  {preempted}
 CPU-thread-1  {preempted}
 CPU-thread-2  {write to addrA which is a write to new page}
 CPU-thread-3  {}
 DEV-thread-0  {}
 DEV-thread-2  {}
 [Time N+3] ------------------------------------------------------------------
 CPU-thread-0  {preempted}
 CPU-thread-1  {preempted}
 CPU-thread-2  {}
 CPU-thread-3  {write to addrB which is a write to new page}
 DEV-thread-0  {}
 DEV-thread-2  {}
 [Time N+4] ------------------------------------------------------------------
 CPU-thread-0  {preempted}
 CPU-thread-1  {COW_step3: {mmu_notifier_invalidate_range_end(addrB)}}
 CPU-thread-2  {}
 CPU-thread-3  {}
 DEV-thread-0  {}
 DEV-thread-2  {}
 [Time N+5] ------------------------------------------------------------------
 CPU-thread-0  {preempted}
 CPU-thread-1  {}
 CPU-thread-2  {}
 CPU-thread-3  {}
 DEV-thread-0  {read addrA from old page}
 DEV-thread-2  {read addrB from new page}

So here because at time N+2 the clear page table entry was not pair with a
notification to invalidate the secondary TLB, the device see the new value for
addrB before seeing the new value for addrA. This break total memory ordering
for the device.

When changing a pte to write protect or to point to a new write protected page
with same content (KSM) it is fine to delay the mmu_notifier_invalidate_range
call to mmu_notifier_invalidate_range_end() outside the page table lock. This
is true even if the thread doing the page table update is preempted right after
releasing page table lock but before call mmu_notifier_invalidate_range_end().
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=============
Multi-Gen LRU
=============
The multi-gen LRU is an alternative LRU implementation that optimizes
page reclaim and improves performance under memory pressure. Page
reclaim decides the kernel's caching policy and ability to overcommit
memory. It directly impacts the kswapd CPU usage and RAM efficiency.

Design overview
===============
Objectives
----------
The design objectives are:

* Good representation of access recency
* Try to profit from spatial locality
* Fast paths to make obvious choices
* Simple self-correcting heuristics

The representation of access recency is at the core of all LRU
implementations. In the multi-gen LRU, each generation represents a
group of pages with similar access recency. Generations establish a
(time-based) common frame of reference and therefore help make better
choices, e.g., between different memcgs on a computer or different
computers in a data center (for job scheduling).

Exploiting spatial locality improves efficiency when gathering the
accessed bit. A rmap walk targets a single page and does not try to
profit from discovering a young PTE. A page table walk can sweep all
the young PTEs in an address space, but the address space can be too
sparse to make a profit. The key is to optimize both methods and use
them in combination.

Fast paths reduce code complexity and runtime overhead. Unmapped pages
do not require TLB flushes; clean pages do not require writeback.
These facts are only helpful when other conditions, e.g., access
recency, are similar. With generations as a common frame of reference,
additional factors stand out. But obvious choices might not be good
choices; thus self-correction is necessary.

The benefits of simple self-correcting heuristics are self-evident.
Again, with generations as a common frame of reference, this becomes
attainable. Specifically, pages in the same generation can be
categorized based on additional factors, and a feedback loop can
statistically compare the refault percentages across those categories
and infer which of them are better choices.

Assumptions
-----------
The protection of hot pages and the selection of cold pages are based
on page access channels and patterns. There are two access channels:

* Accesses through page tables
* Accesses through file descriptors

The protection of the former channel is by design stronger because:

1. The uncertainty in determining the access patterns of the former
   channel is higher due to the approximation of the accessed bit.
2. The cost of evicting the former channel is higher due to the TLB
   flushes required and the likelihood of encountering the dirty bit.
3. The penalty of underprotecting the former channel is higher because
   applications usually do not prepare themselves for major page
   faults like they do for blocked I/O. E.g., GUI applications
   commonly use dedicated I/O threads to avoid blocking rendering
   threads.

There are also two access patterns:

* Accesses exhibiting temporal locality
* Accesses not exhibiting temporal locality

For the reasons listed above, the former channel is assumed to follow
the former pattern unless ``VM_SEQ_READ`` or ``VM_RAND_READ`` is
present, and the latter channel is assumed to follow the latter
pattern unless outlying refaults have been observed.

Workflow overview
=================
Evictable pages are divided into multiple generations for each
``lruvec``. The youngest generation number is stored in
``lrugen->max_seq`` for both anon and file types as they are aged on
an equal footing. The oldest generation numbers are stored in
``lrugen->min_seq[]`` separately for anon and file types as clean file
pages can be evicted regardless of swap constraints. These three
variables are monotonically increasing.

Generation numbers are truncated into ``order_base_2(MAX_NR_GENS+1)``
bits in order to fit into the gen counter in ``folio->flags``. Each
truncated generation number is an index to ``lrugen->folios[]``. The
sliding window technique is used to track at least ``MIN_NR_GENS`` and
at most ``MAX_NR_GENS`` generations. The gen counter stores a value
within ``[1, MAX_NR_GENS]`` while a page is on one of
``lrugen->folios[]``; otherwise it stores zero.

Each generation is divided into multiple tiers. A page accessed ``N``
times through file descriptors is in tier ``order_base_2(N)``. Unlike
generations, tiers do not have dedicated ``lrugen->folios[]``. In
contrast to moving across generations, which requires the LRU lock,
moving across tiers only involves atomic operations on
``folio->flags`` and therefore has a negligible cost. A feedback loop
modeled after the PID controller monitors refaults over all the tiers
from anon and file types and decides which tiers from which types to
evict or protect. The desired effect is to balance refault percentages
between anon and file types proportional to the swappiness level.

There are two conceptually independent procedures: the aging and the
eviction. They form a closed-loop system, i.e., the page reclaim.

Aging
-----
The aging produces young generations. Given an ``lruvec``, it
increments ``max_seq`` when ``max_seq-min_seq+1`` approaches
``MIN_NR_GENS``. The aging promotes hot pages to the youngest
generation when it finds them accessed through page tables; the
demotion of cold pages happens consequently when it increments
``max_seq``. The aging uses page table walks and rmap walks to find
young PTEs. For the former, it iterates ``lruvec_memcg()->mm_list``
and calls ``walk_page_range()`` with each ``mm_struct`` on this list
to scan PTEs, and after each iteration, it increments ``max_seq``. For
the latter, when the eviction walks the rmap and finds a young PTE,
the aging scans the adjacent PTEs. For both, on finding a young PTE,
the aging clears the accessed bit and updates the gen counter of the
page mapped by this PTE to ``(max_seq%MAX_NR_GENS)+1``.

Eviction
--------
The eviction consumes old generations. Given an ``lruvec``, it
increments ``min_seq`` when ``lrugen->folios[]`` indexed by
``min_seq%MAX_NR_GENS`` becomes empty. To select a type and a tier to
evict from, it first compares ``min_seq[]`` to select the older type.
If both types are equally old, it selects the one whose first tier has
a lower refault percentage. The first tier contains single-use
unmapped clean pages, which are the best bet. The eviction sorts a
page according to its gen counter if the aging has found this page
accessed through page tables and updated its gen counter. It also
moves a page to the next generation, i.e., ``min_seq+1``, if this page
was accessed multiple times through file descriptors and the feedback
loop has detected outlying refaults from the tier this page is in. To
this end, the feedback loop uses the first tier as the baseline, for
the reason stated earlier.

Working set protection
----------------------
Each generation is timestamped at birth. If ``lru_gen_min_ttl`` is
set, an ``lruvec`` is protected from the eviction when its oldest
generation was born within ``lru_gen_min_ttl`` milliseconds. In other
words, it prevents the working set of ``lru_gen_min_ttl`` milliseconds
from getting evicted. The OOM killer is triggered if this working set
cannot be kept in memory.

This time-based approach has the following advantages:

1. It is easier to configure because it is agnostic to applications
   and memory sizes.
2. It is more reliable because it is directly wired to the OOM killer.

``mm_struct`` list
------------------
An ``mm_struct`` list is maintained for each memcg, and an
``mm_struct`` follows its owner task to the new memcg when this task
is migrated.

A page table walker iterates ``lruvec_memcg()->mm_list`` and calls
``walk_page_range()`` with each ``mm_struct`` on this list to scan
PTEs. When multiple page table walkers iterate the same list, each of
them gets a unique ``mm_struct``, and therefore they can run in
parallel.

Page table walkers ignore any misplaced pages, e.g., if an
``mm_struct`` was migrated, pages left in the previous memcg will be
ignored when the current memcg is under reclaim. Similarly, page table
walkers will ignore pages from nodes other than the one under reclaim.

This infrastructure also tracks the usage of ``mm_struct`` between
context switches so that page table walkers can skip processes that
have been sleeping since the last iteration.

Rmap/PT walk feedback
---------------------
Searching the rmap for PTEs mapping each page on an LRU list (to test
and clear the accessed bit) can be expensive because pages from
different VMAs (PA space) are not cache friendly to the rmap (VA
space). For workloads mostly using mapped pages, searching the rmap
can incur the highest CPU cost in the reclaim path.

``lru_gen_look_around()`` exploits spatial locality to reduce the
trips into the rmap. It scans the adjacent PTEs of a young PTE and
promotes hot pages. If the scan was done cacheline efficiently, it
adds the PMD entry pointing to the PTE table to the Bloom filter. This
forms a feedback loop between the eviction and the aging.

Bloom filters
-------------
Bloom filters are a space and memory efficient data structure for set
membership test, i.e., test if an element is not in the set or may be
in the set.

In the eviction path, specifically, in ``lru_gen_look_around()``, if a
PMD has a sufficient number of hot pages, its address is placed in the
filter. In the aging path, set membership means that the PTE range
will be scanned for young pages.

Note that Bloom filters are probabilistic on set membership. If a test
is false positive, the cost is an additional scan of a range of PTEs,
which may yield hot pages anyway. Parameters of the filter itself can
control the false positive rate in the limit.

PID controller
--------------
A feedback loop modeled after the Proportional-Integral-Derivative
(PID) controller monitors refaults over anon and file types and
decides which type to evict when both types are available from the
same generation.

The PID controller uses generations rather than the wall clock as the
time domain because a CPU can scan pages at different rates under
varying memory pressure. It calculates a moving average for each new
generation to avoid being permanently locked in a suboptimal state.

Memcg LRU
---------
An memcg LRU is a per-node LRU of memcgs. It is also an LRU of LRUs,
since each node and memcg combination has an LRU of folios (see
``mem_cgroup_lruvec()``). Its goal is to improve the scalability of
global reclaim, which is critical to system-wide memory overcommit in
data centers. Note that memcg LRU only applies to global reclaim.

The basic structure of an memcg LRU can be understood by an analogy to
the active/inactive LRU (of folios):

1. It has the young and the old (generations), i.e., the counterparts
   to the active and the inactive;
2. The increment of ``max_seq`` triggers promotion, i.e., the
   counterpart to activation;
3. Other events trigger similar operations, e.g., offlining an memcg
   triggers demotion, i.e., the counterpart to deactivation.

In terms of global reclaim, it has two distinct features:

1. Sharding, which allows each thread to start at a random memcg (in
   the old generation) and improves parallelism;
2. Eventual fairness, which allows direct reclaim to bail out at will
   and reduces latency without affecting fairness over some time.

In terms of traversing memcgs during global reclaim, it improves the
best-case complexity from O(n) to O(1) and does not affect the
worst-case complexity O(n). Therefore, on average, it has a sublinear
complexity.

Summary
-------
The multi-gen LRU (of folios) can be disassembled into the following
parts:

* Generations
* Rmap walks
* Page table walks via ``mm_struct`` list
* Bloom filters for rmap/PT walk feedback
* PID controller for refault feedback

The aging and the eviction form a producer-consumer model;
specifically, the latter drives the former by the sliding window over
generations. Within the aging, rmap walks drive page table walks by
inserting hot densely populated page tables to the Bloom filters.
Within the eviction, the PID controller uses refaults as the feedback
to select types to evict and tiers to protect.
Started Nov 1999 by Kanoj Sarcar <kanoj@sgi.com>

=============
What is NUMA?
=============

This question can be answered from a couple of perspectives:  the
hardware view and the Linux software view.

From the hardware perspective, a NUMA system is a computer platform that
comprises multiple components or assemblies each of which may contain 0
or more CPUs, local memory, and/or IO buses.  For brevity and to
disambiguate the hardware view of these physical components/assemblies
from the software abstraction thereof, we'll call the components/assemblies
'cells' in this document.

Each of the 'cells' may be viewed as an SMP [symmetric multi-processor] subset
of the system--although some components necessary for a stand-alone SMP system
may not be populated on any given cell.   The cells of the NUMA system are
connected together with some sort of system interconnect--e.g., a crossbar or
point-to-point link are common types of NUMA system interconnects.  Both of
these types of interconnects can be aggregated to create NUMA platforms with
cells at multiple distances from other cells.

For Linux, the NUMA platforms of interest are primarily what is known as Cache
Coherent NUMA or ccNUMA systems.   With ccNUMA systems, all memory is visible
to and accessible from any CPU attached to any cell and cache coherency
is handled in hardware by the processor caches and/or the system interconnect.

Memory access time and effective memory bandwidth varies depending on how far
away the cell containing the CPU or IO bus making the memory access is from the
cell containing the target memory.  For example, access to memory by CPUs
attached to the same cell will experience faster access times and higher
bandwidths than accesses to memory on other, remote cells.  NUMA platforms
can have cells at multiple remote distances from any given cell.

Platform vendors don't build NUMA systems just to make software developers'
lives interesting.  Rather, this architecture is a means to provide scalable
memory bandwidth.  However, to achieve scalable memory bandwidth, system and
application software must arrange for a large majority of the memory references
[cache misses] to be to "local" memory--memory on the same cell, if any--or
to the closest cell with memory.

This leads to the Linux software view of a NUMA system:

Linux divides the system's hardware resources into multiple software
abstractions called "nodes".  Linux maps the nodes onto the physical cells
of the hardware platform, abstracting away some of the details for some
architectures.  As with physical cells, software nodes may contain 0 or more
CPUs, memory and/or IO buses.  And, again, memory accesses to memory on
"closer" nodes--nodes that map to closer cells--will generally experience
faster access times and higher effective bandwidth than accesses to more
remote cells.

For some architectures, such as x86, Linux will "hide" any node representing a
physical cell that has no memory attached, and reassign any CPUs attached to
that cell to a node representing a cell that does have memory.  Thus, on
these architectures, one cannot assume that all CPUs that Linux associates with
a given node will see the same local memory access times and bandwidth.

In addition, for some architectures, again x86 is an example, Linux supports
the emulation of additional nodes.  For NUMA emulation, linux will carve up
the existing nodes--or the system memory for non-NUMA platforms--into multiple
nodes.  Each emulated node will manage a fraction of the underlying cells'
physical memory.  NUMA emulation is useful for testing NUMA kernel and
application features on non-NUMA platforms, and as a sort of memory resource
management mechanism when used together with cpusets.
[see Documentation/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/cpusets.rst]

For each node with memory, Linux constructs an independent memory management
subsystem, complete with its own free page lists, in-use page lists, usage
statistics and locks to mediate access.  In addition, Linux constructs for
each memory zone [one or more of DMA, DMA32, NORMAL, HIGH_MEMORY, MOVABLE],
an ordered "zonelist".  A zonelist specifies the zones/nodes to visit when a
selected zone/node cannot satisfy the allocation request.  This situation,
when a zone has no available memory to satisfy a request, is called
"overflow" or "fallback".

Because some nodes contain multiple zones containing different types of
memory, Linux must decide whether to order the zonelists such that allocations
fall back to the same zone type on a different node, or to a different zone
type on the same node.  This is an important consideration because some zones,
such as DMA or DMA32, represent relatively scarce resources.  Linux chooses
a default Node ordered zonelist. This means it tries to fallback to other zones
from the same node before using remote nodes which are ordered by NUMA distance.

By default, Linux will attempt to satisfy memory allocation requests from the
node to which the CPU that executes the request is assigned.  Specifically,
Linux will attempt to allocate from the first node in the appropriate zonelist
for the node where the request originates.  This is called "local allocation."
If the "local" node cannot satisfy the request, the kernel will examine other
nodes' zones in the selected zonelist looking for the first zone in the list
that can satisfy the request.

Local allocation will tend to keep subsequent access to the allocated memory
"local" to the underlying physical resources and off the system interconnect--
as long as the task on whose behalf the kernel allocated some memory does not
later migrate away from that memory.  The Linux scheduler is aware of the
NUMA topology of the platform--embodied in the "scheduling domains" data
structures [see Documentation/scheduler/sched-domains.rst]--and the scheduler
attempts to minimize task migration to distant scheduling domains.  However,
the scheduler does not take a task's NUMA footprint into account directly.
Thus, under sufficient imbalance, tasks can migrate between nodes, remote
from their initial node and kernel data structures.

System administrators and application designers can restrict a task's migration
to improve NUMA locality using various CPU affinity command line interfaces,
such as taskset(1) and numactl(1), and program interfaces such as
sched_setaffinity(2).  Further, one can modify the kernel's default local
allocation behavior using Linux NUMA memory policy. [see
Documentation/admin-guide/mm/numa_memory_policy.rst].

System administrators can restrict the CPUs and nodes' memories that a non-
privileged user can specify in the scheduling or NUMA commands and functions
using control groups and CPUsets.  [see Documentation/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/cpusets.rst]

On architectures that do not hide memoryless nodes, Linux will include only
zones [nodes] with memory in the zonelists.  This means that for a memoryless
node the "local memory node"--the node of the first zone in CPU's node's
zonelist--will not be the node itself.  Rather, it will be the node that the
kernel selected as the nearest node with memory when it built the zonelists.
So, default, local allocations will succeed with the kernel supplying the
closest available memory.  This is a consequence of the same mechanism that
allows such allocations to fallback to other nearby nodes when a node that
does contain memory overflows.

Some kernel allocations do not want or cannot tolerate this allocation fallback
behavior.  Rather they want to be sure they get memory from the specified node
or get notified that the node has no free memory.  This is usually the case when
a subsystem allocates per CPU memory resources, for example.

A typical model for making such an allocation is to obtain the node id of the
node to which the "current CPU" is attached using one of the kernel's
numa_node_id() or CPU_to_node() functions and then request memory from only
the node id returned.  When such an allocation fails, the requesting subsystem
may revert to its own fallback path.  The slab kernel memory allocator is an
example of this.  Or, the subsystem may choose to disable or not to enable
itself on allocation failure.  The kernel profiling subsystem is an example of
this.

If the architecture supports--does not hide--memoryless nodes, then CPUs
attached to memoryless nodes would always incur the fallback path overhead
or some subsystems would fail to initialize if they attempted to allocated
memory exclusively from a node without memory.  To support such
architectures transparently, kernel subsystems can use the numa_mem_id()
or cpu_to_mem() function to locate the "local memory node" for the calling or
specified CPU.  Again, this is the same node from which default, local page
allocations will be attempted.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

======================
Out Of Memory Handling
======================
=====================
Overcommit Accounting
=====================

The Linux kernel supports the following overcommit handling modes

0
	Heuristic overcommit handling. Obvious overcommits of address
	space are refused. Used for a typical system. It ensures a
	seriously wild allocation fails while allowing overcommit to
	reduce swap usage. This is the default.

1
	Always overcommit. Appropriate for some scientific
	applications. Classic example is code using sparse arrays and
	just relying on the virtual memory consisting almost entirely
	of zero pages.

2
	Don't overcommit. The total address space commit for the
	system is not permitted to exceed swap + a configurable amount
	(default is 50%) of physical RAM.  Depending on the amount you
	use, in most situations this means a process will not be
	killed while accessing pages but will receive errors on memory
	allocation as appropriate.

	Useful for applications that want to guarantee their memory
	allocations will be available in the future without having to
	initialize every page.

The overcommit policy is set via the sysctl ``vm.overcommit_memory``.

The overcommit amount can be set via ``vm.overcommit_ratio`` (percentage)
or ``vm.overcommit_kbytes`` (absolute value). These only have an effect
when ``vm.overcommit_memory`` is set to 2.

The current overcommit limit and amount committed are viewable in
``/proc/meminfo`` as CommitLimit and Committed_AS respectively.

Gotchas
=======

The C language stack growth does an implicit mremap. If you want absolute
guarantees and run close to the edge you MUST mmap your stack for the
largest size you think you will need. For typical stack usage this does
not matter much but it's a corner case if you really really care

In mode 2 the MAP_NORESERVE flag is ignored.


How It Works
============

The overcommit is based on the following rules

For a file backed map
	| SHARED or READ-only	-	0 cost (the file is the map not swap)
	| PRIVATE WRITABLE	-	size of mapping per instance

For an anonymous or ``/dev/zero`` map
	| SHARED			-	size of mapping
	| PRIVATE READ-only	-	0 cost (but of little use)
	| PRIVATE WRITABLE	-	size of mapping per instance

Additional accounting
	| Pages made writable copies by mmap
	| shmfs memory drawn from the same pool

Status
======

*	We account mmap memory mappings
*	We account mprotect changes in commit
*	We account mremap changes in size
*	We account brk
*	We account munmap
*	We report the commit status in /proc
*	Account and check on fork
*	Review stack handling/building on exec
*	SHMfs accounting
*	Implement actual limit enforcement

To Do
=====
*	Account ptrace pages (this is hard)
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===============
Page Allocation
===============
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

==========
Page Cache
==========

The page cache is the primary way that the user and the rest of the kernel
interact with filesystems.  It can be bypassed (e.g. with O_DIRECT),
but normal reads, writes and mmaps go through the page cache.

Folios
======

The folio is the unit of memory management within the page cache.
Operations 
==============
Page fragments
==============

A page fragment is an arbitrary-length arbitrary-offset area of memory
which resides within a 0 or higher order compound page.  Multiple
fragments within that page are individually refcounted, in the page's
reference counter.

The page_frag functions, page_frag_alloc and page_frag_free, provide a
simple allocation framework for page fragments.  This is used by the
network stack and network device drivers to provide a backing region of
memory for use as either an sk_buff->head, or to be used in the "frags"
portion of skb_shared_info.

In order to make use of the page fragment APIs a backing page fragment
cache is needed.  This provides a central point for the fragment allocation
and tracks allows multiple calls to make use of a cached page.  The
advantage to doing this is that multiple calls to get_page can be avoided
which can be expensive at allocation time.  However due to the nature of
this caching it is required that any calls to the cache be protected by
either a per-cpu limitation, or a per-cpu limitation and forcing interrupts
to be disabled when executing the fragment allocation.

The network stack uses two separate caches per CPU to handle fragment
allocation.  The netdev_alloc_cache is used by callers making use of the
netdev_alloc_frag and __netdev_alloc_skb calls.  The napi_alloc_cache is
used by callers of the __napi_alloc_frag and napi_alloc_skb calls.  The
main difference between these two calls is the context in which they may be
called.  The "netdev" prefixed functions are usable in any context as these
functions will disable interrupts, while the "napi" prefixed functions are
only usable within the softirq context.

Many network device drivers use a similar methodology for allocating page
fragments, but the page fragments are cached at the ring or descriptor
level.  In order to enable these cases it is necessary to provide a generic
way of tearing down a page cache.  For this reason __page_frag_cache_drain
was implemented.  It allows for freeing multiple references from a single
page via a single call.  The advantage to doing this is that it allows for
cleaning up the multiple references that were added to a page in order to
avoid calling get_page per allocation.

Alexander Duyck, Nov 29, 2016.
==============
Page migration
==============

Page migration allows moving the physical location of pages between
nodes in a NUMA system while the process is running. This means that the
virtual addresses that the process sees do not change. However, the
system rearranges the physical location of those pages.

Also see Documentation/mm/hmm.rst for migrating pages to or from device
private memory.

The main intent of page migration is to reduce the latency of memory accesses
by moving pages near to the processor where the process accessing that memory
is running.

Page migration allows a process to manually relocate the node on which its
pages are located through the MF_MOVE and MF_MOVE_ALL options while setting
a new memory policy via mbind(). The pages of a process can also be relocated
from another process using the sys_migrate_pages() function call. The
migrate_pages() function call takes two sets of nodes and moves pages of a
process that are located on the from nodes to the destination nodes.
Page migration functions are provided by the numactl package by Andi Kleen
(a version later than 0.9.3 is required. Get it from
https://github.com/numactl/numactl.git). numactl provides libnuma
which provides an interface similar to other NUMA functionality for page
migration.  cat ``/proc/<pid>/numa_maps`` allows an easy review of where the
pages of a process are located. See also the numa_maps documentation in the
proc(5) man page.

Manual migration is useful if for example the scheduler has relocated
a process to a processor on a distant node. A batch scheduler or an
administrator may detect the situation and move the pages of the process
nearer to the new processor. The kernel itself only provides
manual page migration support. Automatic page migration may be implemented
through user space processes that move pages. A special function call
"move_pages" allows the moving of individual pages within a process.
For example, A NUMA profiler may obtain a log showing frequent off-node
accesses and may use the result to move pages to more advantageous
locations.

Larger installations usually partition the system using cpusets into
sections of nodes. Paul Jackson has equipped cpusets with the ability to
move pages when a task is moved to another cpuset (See
:ref:`CPUSETS <cpusets>`).
Cpusets allow the automation of process locality. If a task is moved to
a new cpuset then also all its pages are moved with it so that the
performance of the process does not sink dramatically. Also the pages
of processes in a cpuset are moved if the allowed memory nodes of a
cpuset are changed.

Page migration allows the preservation of the relative location of pages
within a group of nodes for all migration techniques which will preserve a
particular memory allocation pattern generated even after migrating a
process. This is necessary in order to preserve the memory latencies.
Processes will run with similar performance after migration.

Page migration occurs in several steps. First a high level
description for those trying to use migrate_pages() from the kernel
(for userspace usage see the Andi Kleen's numactl package mentioned above)
and then a low level description of how the low level details work.

In kernel use of migrate_pages()
================================

1. Remove folios from the LRU.

   Lists of folios to be migrated are generated by scanning over
   folios and moving them into lists. This is done by
   calling folio_isolate_lru().
   Calling folio_isolate_lru() increases the references to the folio
   so that it cannot vanish while the folio migration occurs.
   It also prevents the swapper or other scans from encountering
   the folio.

2. We need to have a function of type new_folio_t that can be
   passed to migrate_pages(). This function should figure out
   how to allocate the correct new folio given the old folio.

3. The migrate_pages() function is called which attempts
   to do the migration. It will call the function to allocate
   the new folio for each folio that is considered for moving.

How migrate_pages() works
=========================

migrate_pages() does several passes over its list of folios. A folio is moved
if all references to a folio are removable at the time. The folio has
already been removed from the LRU via folio_isolate_lru() and the refcount
is increased so that the folio cannot be freed while folio migration occurs.

Steps:

1. Lock the page to be migrated.

2. Ensure that writeback is complete.

3. Lock the new page that we want to move to. It is locked so that accesses to
   this (not yet up-to-date) page immediately block while the move is in progress.

4. All the page table references to the page are converted to migration
   entries. This decreases the mapcount of a page. If the resulting
   mapcount is not zero then we do not migrate the page. All user space
   processes that attempt to access the page will now wait on the page lock
   or wait for the migration page table entry to be removed.

5. The i_pages lock is taken. This will cause all processes trying
   to access the page via the mapping to block on the spinlock.

6. The refcount of the page is examined and we back out if references remain.
   Otherwise, we know that we are the only one referencing this page.

7. The radix tree is checked and if it does not contain the pointer to this
   page then we back out because someone else modified the radix tree.

8. The new page is prepped with some settings from the old page so that
   accesses to the new page will discover a page with the correct settings.

9. The radix tree is changed to point to the new page.

10. The reference count of the old page is dropped because the address space
    reference is gone. A reference to the new page is established because
    the new page is referenced by the address space.

11. The i_pages lock is dropped. With that lookups in the mapping
    become possible again. Processes will move from spinning on the lock
    to sleeping on the locked new page.

12. The page contents are copied to the new page.

13. The remaining page flags are copied to the new page.

14. The old page flags are cleared to indicate that the page does
    not provide any information anymore.

15. Queued up writeback on the new page is triggered.

16. If migration entries were inserted into the page table, then replace them
    with real ptes. Doing so will enable access for user space processes not
    already waiting for the page lock.

17. The page locks are dropped from the old and new page.
    Processes waiting on the page lock will redo their page faults
    and will reach the new page.

18. The new page is moved to the LRU and can be scanned by the swapper,
    etc. again.

Non-LRU page migration
======================

Although migration originally aimed for reducing the latency of memory
accesses for NUMA, compaction also uses migration to create high-order
pages.  For compaction purposes, it is also useful to be able to move
non-LRU pages, such as zsmalloc and virtio-balloon pages.

If a driver wants to make its pages movable, it should define a struct
movable_operations.  It then needs to call __SetPageMovable() on each
page that it may be able to move.  This uses the ``page->mapping`` field,
so this field is not available for the driver to use for other purposes.

Monitoring Migration
=====================

The following events (counters) can be used to monitor page migration.

1. PGMIGRATE_SUCCESS: Normal page migration success. Each count means that a
   page was migrated. If the page was a non-THP and non-hugetlb page, then
   this counter is increased by one. If the page was a THP or hugetlb, then
   this counter is increased by the number of THP or hugetlb subpages.
   For example, migration of a single 2MB THP that has 4KB-size base pages
   (subpages) will cause this counter to increase by 512.

2. PGMIGRATE_FAIL: Normal page migration failure. Same counting rules as for
   PGMIGRATE_SUCCESS, above: this will be increased by the number of subpages,
   if it was a THP or hugetlb.

3. THP_MIGRATION_SUCCESS: A THP was migrated without being split.

4. THP_MIGRATION_FAIL: A THP could not be migrated nor it could be split.

5. THP_MIGRATION_SPLIT: A THP was migrated, but not as such: first, the THP had
   to be split. After splitting, a migration retry was used for its sub-pages.

THP_MIGRATION_* events also update the appropriate PGMIGRATE_SUCCESS or
PGMIGRATE_FAIL events. For example, a THP migration failure will cause both
THP_MIGRATION_FAIL and PGMIGRATE_FAIL to increase.

Christoph Lameter, May 8, 2006.
Minchan Kim, Mar 28, 2016.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/migrate.h
==================================================
page owner: Tracking about who allocated each page
==================================================

Introduction
============

page owner is for the tracking about who allocated each page.
It can be used to debug memory leak or to find a memory hogger.
When allocation happens, information about allocation such as call stack
and order of pages is stored into certain storage for each page.
When we need to know about status of all pages, we can get and analyze
this information.

Although we already have tracepoint for tracing page allocation/free,
using it for analyzing who allocate each page is rather complex. We need
to enlarge the trace buffer for preventing overlapping until userspace
program launched. And, launched program continually dump out the trace
buffer for later analysis and it would change system behaviour with more
possibility rather than just keeping it in memory, so bad for debugging.

page owner can also be used for various purposes. For example, accurate
fragmentation statistics can be obtained through gfp flag information of
each page. It is already implemented and activated if page owner is
enabled. Other usages are more than welcome.

It can also be used to show all the stacks and their current number of
allocated base pages, which gives us a quick overview of where the memory
is going without the need to screen through all the pages and match the
allocation and free operation.

page owner is disabled by default. So, if you'd like to use it, you need
to add "page_owner=on" to your boot cmdline. If the kernel is built
with page owner and page owner is disabled in runtime due to not enabling
boot option, runtime overhead is marginal. If disabled in runtime, it
doesn't require memory to store owner information, so there is no runtime
memory overhead. And, page owner inserts just two unlikely branches into
the page allocator hotpath and if not enabled, then allocation is done
like as the kernel without page owner. These two unlikely branches should
not affect to allocation performance, especially if the static keys jump
label patching functionality is available. Following is the kernel's code
size change due to this facility.

Although enabling page owner increases kernel size by several kilobytes,
most of this code is outside page allocator and its hot path. Building
the kernel with page owner and turning it on if needed would be great
option to debug kernel memory problem.

There is one notice that is caused by implementation detail. page owner
stores information into the memory from struct page extension. This memory
is initialized some time later than that page allocator starts in sparse
memory system, so, until initialization, many pages can be allocated and
they would have no owner information. To fix it up, these early allocated
pages are investigated and marked as allocated in initialization phase.
Although it doesn't mean that they have the right owner information,
at least, we can tell whether the page is allocated or not,
more accurately. On 2GB memory x86-64 VM box, 13343 early allocated pages
are caught and marked, although they are mostly allocated from struct
page extension feature. Anyway, after that, no page is left in
un-tracking state.

Usage
=====

1) Build user-space helper::

	cd tools/mm
	make page_owner_sort

2) Enable page owner: add "page_owner=on" to boot cmdline.

3) Do the job that you want to debug.

4) Analyze information from page owner::

	cat /sys/kernel/debug/page_owner_stacks/show_stacks > stacks.txt
	cat stacks.txt
	 post_alloc_hook+0x177/0x1a0
	 get_page_from_freelist+0xd01/0xd80
	 __alloc_pages+0x39e/0x7e0
	 allocate_slab+0xbc/0x3f0
	 ___slab_alloc+0x528/0x8a0
	 kmem_cache_alloc+0x224/0x3b0
	 sk_prot_alloc+0x58/0x1a0
	 sk_alloc+0x32/0x4f0
	 inet_create+0x427/0xb50
	 __sock_create+0x2e4/0x650
	 inet_ctl_sock_create+0x30/0x180
	 igmp_net_init+0xc1/0x130
	 ops_init+0x167/0x410
	 setup_net+0x304/0xa60
	 copy_net_ns+0x29b/0x4a0
	 create_new_namespaces+0x4a1/0x820
	nr_base_pages: 16
	...
	...
	echo 7000 > /sys/kernel/debug/page_owner_stacks/count_threshold
	cat /sys/kernel/debug/page_owner_stacks/show_stacks> stacks_7000.txt
	cat stacks_7000.txt
	 post_alloc_hook+0x177/0x1a0
	 get_page_from_freelist+0xd01/0xd80
	 __alloc_pages+0x39e/0x7e0
	 alloc_pages_mpol+0x22e/0x490
	 folio_alloc+0xd5/0x110
	 filemap_alloc_folio+0x78/0x230
	 page_cache_ra_order+0x287/0x6f0
	 filemap_get_pages+0x517/0x1160
	 filemap_read+0x304/0x9f0
	 xfs_file_buffered_read+0xe6/0x1d0 [xfs]
	 xfs_file_read_iter+0x1f0/0x380 [xfs]
	 __kernel_read+0x3b9/0x730
	 kernel_read_file+0x309/0x4d0
	 __do_sys_finit_module+0x381/0x730
	 do_syscall_64+0x8d/0x150
	 entry_SYSCALL_64_after_hwframe+0x62/0x6a
	nr_base_pages: 20824
	...

	cat /sys/kernel/debug/page_owner > page_owner_full.txt
	./page_owner_sort page_owner_full.txt sorted_page_owner.txt

   The general output of ``page_owner_full.txt`` is as follows::

	Page allocated via order XXX, ...
	PFN XXX ...
	// Detailed stack

	Page allocated via order XXX, ...
	PFN XXX ...
	// Detailed stack
    By default, it will do full pfn dump, to start with a given pfn,
    page_owner supports fseek.

    FILE *fp = fopen("/sys/kernel/debug/page_owner", "r");
    fseek(fp, pfn_start, SEEK_SET);

   The ``page_owner_sort`` tool ignores ``PFN`` rows, puts the remaining rows
   in buf, uses regexp to extract the page order value, counts the times
   and pages of buf, and finally sorts them according to the parameter(s).

   See the result about who allocated each page
   in the ``sorted_page_owner.txt``. General output::

	XXX times, XXX pages:
	Page allocated via order XXX, ...
	// Detailed stack

   By default, ``page_owner_sort`` is sorted according to the times of buf.
   If you want to sort by the page nums of buf, use the ``-m`` parameter.
   The detailed parameters are:

   fundamental function::

	Sort:
		-a		Sort by memory allocation time.
		-m		Sort by total memory.
		-p		Sort by pid.
		-P		Sort by tgid.
		-n		Sort by task command name.
		-r		Sort by memory release time.
		-s		Sort by stack trace.
		-t		Sort by times (default).
		--sort <order>	Specify sorting order.  Sorting syntax is [+|-]key[,[+|-]key[,...]].
				Choose a key from the **STANDARD FORMAT SPECIFIERS** section. The "+" is
				optional since default direction is increasing numerical or lexicographic
				order. Mixed use of abbreviated and complete-form of keys is allowed.

		Examples:
				./page_owner_sort <input> <output> --sort=n,+pid,-tgid
				./page_owner_sort <input> <output> --sort=at

   additional function::

	Cull:
		--cull <rules>
				Specify culling rules.Culling syntax is key[,key[,...]].Choose a
				multi-letter key from the **STANDARD FORMAT SPECIFIERS** section.

		<rules> is a single argument in the form of a comma-separated list,
		which offers a way to specify individual culling rules.  The recognized
		keywords are described in the **STANDARD FORMAT SPECIFIERS** section below.
		<rules> can be specified by the sequence of keys k1,k2, ..., as described in
		the STANDARD SORT KEYS section below. Mixed use of abbreviated and
		complete-form of keys is allowed.

		Examples:
				./page_owner_sort <input> <output> --cull=stacktrace
				./page_owner_sort <input> <output> --cull=st,pid,name
				./page_owner_sort <input> <output> --cull=n,f

	Filter:
		-f		Filter out the information of blocks whose memory has been released.

	Select:
		--pid <pidlist>		Select by pid. This selects the blocks whose process ID
					numbers appear in <pidlist>.
		--tgid <tgidlist>	Select by tgid. This selects the blocks whose thread
					group ID numbers appear in <tgidlist>.
		--name <cmdlist>	Select by task command name. This selects the blocks whose
					task command name appear in <cmdlist>.

		<pidlist>, <tgidlist>, <cmdlist> are single arguments in the form of a comma-separated list,
		which offers a way to specify individual selecting rules.


		Examples:
				./page_owner_sort <input> <output> --pid=1
				./page_owner_sort <input> <output> --tgid=1,2,3
				./page_owner_sort <input> <output> --name name1,name2

STANDARD FORMAT SPECIFIERS
==========================
::

  For --sort option:

	KEY		LONG		DESCRIPTION
	p		pid		process ID
	tg		tgid		thread group ID
	n		name		task command name
	st		stacktrace	stack trace of the page allocation
	T		txt		full text of block
	ft		free_ts		timestamp of the page when it was released
	at		alloc_ts	timestamp of the page when it was allocated
	ator		allocator	memory allocator for pages

  For --cull option:

	KEY		LONG		DESCRIPTION
	p		pid		process ID
	tg		tgid		thread group ID
	n		name		task command name
	f		free		whether the page has been released or not
	st		stacktrace	stack trace of the page allocation
	ator		allocator	memory allocator for pages
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

============
Page Reclaim
============
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

================
Page Table Check
================

Introduction
============

Page table check allows to harden the kernel by ensuring that some types of
the memory corruptions are prevented.

Page table check performs extra verifications at the time when new pages become
accessible from the userspace by getting their page table entries (PTEs PMDs
etc.) added into the table.

In case of most detected corruption, the kernel is crashed. There is a small
performance and memory overhead associated with the page table check. Therefore,
it is disabled by default, but can be optionally enabled on systems where the
extra hardening outweighs the performance costs. Also, because page table check
is synchronous, it can help with debugging double map memory corruption issues,
by crashing kernel at the time wrong mapping occurs instead of later which is
often the case with memory corruptions bugs.

It can also be used to do page table entry checks over various flags, dump
warnings when illegal combinations of entry flags are detected.  Currently,
userfaultfd is the only user of such to sanity check wr-protect bit against
any writable flags.  Illegal flag combinations will not directly cause data
corruption in this case immediately, but that will cause read-only data to
be writable, leading to corrupt when the page content is later modified.

Double mapping detection logic
==============================

+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
| Current Mapping   | New mapping       | Permissions       | Rule             |
+===================+===================+===================+==================+
| Anonymous         | Anonymous         | Read              | Allow            |
+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
| Anonymous         | Anonymous         | Read / Write      | Prohibit         |
+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
| Anonymous         | Named             | Any               | Prohibit         |
+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
| Named             | Anonymous         | Any               | Prohibit         |
+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
| Named             | Named             | Any               | Allow            |
+-------------------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+

Enabling Page Table Check
=========================

Build kernel with:

- PAGE_TABLE_CHECK=y
  Note, it can only be enabled on platforms where ARCH_SUPPORTS_PAGE_TABLE_CHECK
  is available.

- Boot with 'page_table_check=on' kernel parameter.

Optionally, build kernel with PAGE_TABLE_CHECK_ENFORCED in order to have page
table support without extra kernel parameter.

Implementation notes
====================

We specifically decided not to use VMA information in order to avoid relying on
MM states (except for limited "struct page" info). The page table check is a
separate from Linux-MM state machine that verifies that the user accessible
pages are not falsely shared.

PAGE_TABLE_CHECK depends on EXCLUSIVE_SYSTEM_RAM. The reason is that without
EXCLUSIVE_SYSTEM_RAM, users are allowed to map arbitrary physical memory
regions into the userspace via /dev/mem. At the same time, pages may change
their properties (e.g., from anonymous pages to named pages) while they are
still being mapped in the userspace, leading to "corruption" detected by the
page table check.

Even with EXCLUSIVE_SYSTEM_RAM, I/O pages may be still allowed to be mapped via
/dev/mem. However, these pages are always considered as named pages, so they
won't break the logic used in the page table check.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===========
Page Tables
===========

Paged virtual memory was invented along with virtual memory as a concept in
1962 on the Ferranti Atlas Computer which was the first computer with paged
virtual memory. The feature migrated to newer computers and became a de facto
feature of all Unix-like systems as time went by. In 1985 the feature was
included in the Intel 80386, which was the CPU Linux 1.0 was developed on.

Page tables map virtual addresses as seen by the CPU into physical addresses
as seen on the external memory bus.

Linux defines page tables as a hierarchy which is currently five levels in
height. The architecture code for each supported architecture will then
map this to the restrictions of the hardware.

The physical address corresponding to the virtual address is often referenced
by the underlying physical page frame. The **page frame number** or **pfn**
is the physical address of the page (as seen on the external memory bus)
divided by `PAGE_SIZE`.

Physical memory address 0 will be *pfn 0* and the highest pfn will be
the last page of physical memory the external address bus of the CPU can
address.

With a page granularity of 4KB and a address range of 32 bits, pfn 0 is at
address 0x00000000, pfn 1 is at address 0x00001000, pfn 2 is at 0x00002000
and so on until we reach pfn 0xfffff at 0xfffff000. With 16KB pages pfs are
at 0x00004000, 0x00008000 ... 0xffffc000 and pfn goes from 0 to 0x3fffff.

As you can see, with 4KB pages the page base address uses bits 12-31 of the
address, and this is why `PAGE_SHIFT` in this case is defined as 12 and
`PAGE_SIZE` is usually defined in terms of the page shift as `(1 << PAGE_SHIFT)`

Over time a deeper hierarchy has been developed in response to increasing memory
sizes. When Linux was created, 4KB pages and a single page table called
`swapper_pg_dir` with 1024 entries was used, covering 4MB which coincided with
the fact that Torvald's first computer had 4MB of physical memory. Entries in
this single table were referred to as *PTE*:s - page table entries.

The software page table hierarchy reflects the fact that page table hardware has
become hierarchical and that in turn is done to save page table memory and
speed up mapping.

One could of course imagine a single, linear page table with enormous amounts
of entries, breaking down the whole memory into single pages. Such a page table
would be very sparse, because large portions of the virtual memory usually
remains unused. By using hierarchical page tables large holes in the virtual
address space does not waste valuable page table memory, because it will suffice
to mark large areas as unmapped at a higher level in the page table hierarchy.

Additionally, on modern CPUs, a higher level page table entry can point directly
to a physical memory range, which allows mapping a contiguous range of several
megabytes or even gigabytes in a single high-level page table entry, taking
shortcuts in mapping virtual memory to physical memory: there is no need to
traverse deeper in the hierarchy when you find a large mapped range like this.

The page table hierarchy has now developed into this::

  +-----+
  | PGD |
  +-----+
     |
     |   +-----+
     +-->| P4D |
         +-----+
            |
            |   +-----+
            +-->| PUD |
                +-----+
                   |
                   |   +-----+
                   +-->| PMD |
                       +-----+
                          |
                          |   +-----+
                          +-->| PTE |
                              +-----+


Symbols on the different levels of the page table hierarchy have the following
meaning beginning from the bottom:

- **pte**, `pte_t`, `pteval_t` = **Page Table Entry** - mentioned earlier.
  The *pte* is an array of `PTRS_PER_PTE` elements of the `pteval_t` type, each
  mapping a single page of virtual memory to a single page of physical memory.
  The architecture defines the size and contents of `pteval_t`.

  A typical example is that the `pteval_t` is a 32- or 64-bit value with the
  upper bits being a **pfn** (page frame number), and the lower bits being some
  architecture-specific bits such as memory protection.

  The **entry** part of the name is a bit confusing because while in Linux 1.0
  this did refer to a single page table entry in the single top level page
  table, it was retrofitted to be an array of mapping elements when two-level
  page tables were first introduced, so the *pte* is the lowermost page
  *table*, not a page table *entry*.

- **pmd**, `pmd_t`, `pmdval_t` = **Page Middle Directory**, the hierarchy right
  above the *pte*, with `PTRS_PER_PMD` references to the *pte*:s.

- **pud**, `pud_t`, `pudval_t` = **Page Upper Directory** was introduced after
  the other levels to handle 4-level page tables. It is potentially unused,
  or *folded* as we will discuss later.

- **p4d**, `p4d_t`, `p4dval_t` = **Page Level 4 Directory** was introduced to
  handle 5-level page tables after the *pud* was introduced. Now it was clear
  that we needed to replace *pgd*, *pmd*, *pud* etc with a figure indicating the
  directory level and that we cannot go on with ad hoc names any more. This
  is only used on systems which actually have 5 levels of page tables, otherwise
  it is folded.

- **pgd**, `pgd_t`, `pgdval_t` = **Page Global Directory** - the Linux kernel
  main page table handling the PGD for the kernel memory is still found in
  `swapper_pg_dir`, but each userspace process in the system also has its own
  memory context and thus its own *pgd*, found in `struct mm_struct` which
  in turn is referenced to in each `struct task_struct`. So tasks have memory
  context in the form of a `struct mm_struct` and this in turn has a
  `struct pgt_t *pgd` pointer to the corresponding page global directory.

To repeat: each level in the page table hierarchy is a *array of pointers*, so
the **pgd** contains `PTRS_PER_PGD` pointers to the next level below, **p4d**
contains `PTRS_PER_P4D` pointers to **pud** items and so on. The number of
pointers on each level is architecture-defined.::

        PMD
  --> +-----+           PTE
      | ptr |-------> +-----+
      | ptr |-        | ptr |-------> PAGE
      | ptr | \       | ptr |
      | ptr |  \        ...
      | ... |   \
      | ptr |    \         PTE
      +-----+     +----> +-----+
                         | ptr |-------> PAGE
                         | ptr |
                           ...


Page Table Folding
==================

If the architecture does not use all the page table levels, they can be *folded*
which means skipped, and all operations performed on page tables will be
compile-time augmented to just skip a level when accessing the next lower
level.

Page table handling code that wishes to be architecture-neutral, such as the
virtual memory manager, will need to be written so that it traverses all of the
currently five levels. This style should also be preferred for
architecture-specific code, so as to be robust to future changes.


MMU, TLB, and Page Faults
=========================

The `Memory Management Unit (MMU)` is a hardware component that handles virtual
to physical address translations. It may use relatively small caches in hardware
called `Translation Lookaside Buffers (TLBs)` and `Page Walk Caches` to speed up
these translations.

When CPU accesses a memory location, it provides a virtual address to the MMU,
which checks if there is the existing translation in the TLB or in the Page
Walk Caches (on architectures that support them). If no translation is found,
MMU uses the page walks to determine the physical address and create the map.

The dirty bit for a page is set (i.e., turned on) when the page is written to.
Each page of memory has associated permission and dirty bits. The latter
indicate that the page has been modified since it was loaded into memory.

If nothing prevents it, eventually the physical memory can be accessed and the
requested operation on the physical frame is performed.

There are several reasons why the MMU can't find certain translations. It could
happen because the CPU is trying to access memory that the current task is not
permitted to, or because the data is not present into physical memory.

When these conditions happen, the MMU triggers page faults, which are types of
exceptions that signal the CPU to pause the current execution and run a special
function to handle the mentioned exceptions.

There are common and expected causes of page faults. These are triggered by
process management optimization techniques called "Lazy Allocation" and
"Copy-on-Write". Page faults may also happen when frames have been swapped out
to persistent storage (swap partition or file) and evicted from their physical
locations.

These techniques improve memory efficiency, reduce latency, and minimize space
occupation. This document won't go deeper into the details of "Lazy Allocation"
and "Copy-on-Write" because these subjects are out of scope as they belong to
Process Address Management.

Swapping differentiates itself from the other mentioned techniques because it's
undesirable since it's performed as a means to reduce memory under heavy
pressure.

Swapping can't work for memory mapped by kernel logical addresses. These are a
subset of the kernel virtual space that directly maps a contiguous range of
physical memory. Given any logical address, its physical address is determined
with simple arithmetic on an offset. Accesses to logical addresses are fast
because they avoid the need for complex page table lookups at the expenses of
frames not being evictable and pageable out.

If the kernel fails to make room for the data that must be present in the
physical frames, the kernel invokes the out-of-memory (OOM) killer to make room
by terminating lower priority processes until pressure reduces under a safe
threshold.

Additionally, page faults may be also caused by code bugs or by maliciously
crafted addresses that the CPU is instructed to access. A thread of a process
could use instructions to address (non-shared) memory which does not belong to
its own address space, or could try to execute an instruction that want to write
to a read-only location.

If the above-mentioned conditions happen in user-space, the kernel sends a
`Segmentation Fault` (SIGSEGV) signal to the current thread. That signal usually
causes the termination of the thread and of the process it belongs to.

This document is going to simplify and show an high altitude view of how the
Linux kernel handles these page faults, creates tables and tables' entries,
check if memory is present and, if not, requests to load data from persistent
storage or from other devices, and updates the MMU and its caches.

The first steps are architecture dependent. Most architectures jump to
`do_page_fault()`, whereas the x86 interrupt handler is defined by the
`DEFINE_IDTENTRY_RAW_ERRORCODE()` macro which calls `handle_page_fault()`.

Whatever the routes, all architectures end up to the invocation of
`handle_mm_fault()` which, in turn, (likely) ends up calling
`__handle_mm_fault()` to carry out the actual work of allocating the page
tables.

The unfortunate case of not being able to call `__handle_mm_fault()` means
that the virtual address is pointing to areas of physical memory which are not
permitted to be accessed (at least from the current context). This
condition resolves to the kernel sending the above-mentioned SIGSEGV signal
to the process and leads to the consequences already explained.

`__handle_mm_fault()` carries out its work by calling several functions to
find the entry's offsets of the upper layers of the page tables and allocate
the tables that it may need.

The functions that look for the offset have names like `*_offset()`, where the
"*" is for pgd, p4d, pud, pmd, pte; instead the functions to allocate the
corresponding tables, layer by layer, are called `*_alloc`, using the
above-mentioned convention to name them after the corresponding types of tables
in the hierarchy.

The page table walk may end at one of the middle or upper layers (PMD, PUD).

Linux supports larger page sizes than the usual 4KB (i.e., the so called
`huge pages`). When using these kinds of larger pages, higher level pages can
directly map them, with no need to use lower level page entries (PTE). Huge
pages contain large contiguous physical regions that usually span from 2MB to
1GB. They are respectively mapped by the PMD and PUD page entries.

The huge pages bring with them several benefits like reduced TLB pressure,
reduced page table overhead, memory allocation efficiency, and performance
improvement for certain workloads. However, these benefits come with
trade-offs, like wasted memory and allocation challenges.

At the very end of the walk with allocations, if it didn't return errors,
`__handle_mm_fault()` finally calls `handle_pte_fault()`, which via `do_fault()`
performs one of `do_read_fault()`, `do_cow_fault()`, `do_shared_fault()`.
"read", "cow", "shared" give hints about the reasons and the kind of fault it's
handling.

The actual implementation of the workflow is very complex. Its design allows
Linux to handle page faults in a way that is tailored to the specific
characteristics of each architecture, while still sharing a common overall
structure.

To conclude this high altitude view of how Linux handles page faults, let's
add that the page faults handler can be disabled and enabled respectively with
`pagefault_disable()` and `pagefault_enable()`.

Several code path make use of the latter two functions because they need to
disable traps into the page faults handler, mostly to prevent deadlocks.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===============
Physical Memory
===============

Linux is available for a wide range of architectures so there is a need for an
architecture-independent abstraction to represent the physical memory. This
chapter describes the structures used to manage physical memory in a running
system.

The first principal concept prevalent in the memory management is
`Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA)
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-uniform_memory_access>`_.
With multi-core and multi-socket machines, memory may be arranged into banks
that incur a different cost to access depending on the “distance” from the
processor. For example, there might be a bank of memory assigned to each CPU or
a bank of memory very suitable for DMA near peripheral devices.

Each bank is called a node and the concept is represented under Linux by a
``struct pglist_data`` even if the architecture is UMA. This structure is
always referenced by its typedef ``pg_data_t``. A ``pg_data_t`` structure
for a particular node can be referenced by ``NODE_DATA(nid)`` macro where
``nid`` is the ID of that node.

For NUMA architectures, the node structures are allocated by the architecture
specific code early during boot. Usually, these structures are allocated
locally on the memory bank they represent. For UMA architectures, only one
static ``pg_data_t`` structure called ``contig_page_data`` is used. Nodes will
be discussed further in Section :ref:`Nodes <nodes>`

The entire physical address space is partitioned into one or more blocks
called zones which represent ranges within memory. These ranges are usually
determined by architectural constraints for accessing the physical memory.
The memory range within a node that corresponds to a particular zone is
described by a ``struct zone``, typedeffed to ``zone_t``. Each zone has
one of the types described below.

* ``ZONE_DMA`` and ``ZONE_DMA32`` historically represented memory suitable for
  DMA by peripheral devices that cannot access all of the addressable
  memory. For many years there are better more and robust interfaces to get
  memory with DMA specific requirements (Documentation/core-api/dma-api.rst),
  but ``ZONE_DMA`` and ``ZONE_DMA32`` still represent memory ranges that have
  restrictions on how they can be accessed.
  Depending on the architecture, either of these zone types or even they both
  can be disabled at build time using ``CONFIG_ZONE_DMA`` and
  ``CONFIG_ZONE_DMA32`` configuration options. Some 64-bit platforms may need
  both zones as they support peripherals with different DMA addressing
  limitations.

* ``ZONE_NORMAL`` is for normal memory that can be accessed by the kernel all
  the time. DMA operations can be performed on pages in this zone if the DMA
  devices support transfers to all addressable memory. ``ZONE_NORMAL`` is
  always enabled.

* ``ZONE_HIGHMEM`` is the part of the physical memory that is not covered by a
  permanent mapping in the kernel page tables. The memory in this zone is only
  accessible to the kernel using temporary mappings. This zone is available
  only on some 32-bit architectures and is enabled with ``CONFIG_HIGHMEM``.

* ``ZONE_MOVABLE`` is for normal accessible memory, just like ``ZONE_NORMAL``.
  The difference is that the contents of most pages in ``ZONE_MOVABLE`` is
  movable. That means that while virtual addresses of these pages do not
  change, their content may move between different physical pages. Often
  ``ZONE_MOVABLE`` is populated during memory hotplug, but it may be
  also populated on boot using one of ``kernelcore``, ``movablecore`` and
  ``movable_node`` kernel command line parameters. See
  Documentation/mm/page_migration.rst and
  Documentation/admin-guide/mm/memory-hotplug.rst for additional details.

* ``ZONE_DEVICE`` represents memory residing on devices such as PMEM and GPU.
  It has different characteristics than RAM zone types and it exists to provide
  :ref:`struct page <Pages>` and memory map services for device driver
  identified physical address ranges. ``ZONE_DEVICE`` is enabled with
  configuration option ``CONFIG_ZONE_DEVICE``.

It is important to note that many kernel operations can only take place using
``ZONE_NORMAL`` so it is the most performance critical zone. Zones are
discussed further in Section :ref:`Zones <zones>`.

The relation between node and zone extents is determined by the physical memory
map reported by the firmware, architectural constraints for memory addressing
and certain parameters in the kernel command line.

For example, with 32-bit kernel on an x86 UMA machine with 2 Gbytes of RAM the
entire memory will be on node 0 and there will be three zones: ``ZONE_DMA``,
``ZONE_NORMAL`` and ``ZONE_HIGHMEM``::

  0                                                            2G
  +-------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                            node 0                           |
  +-------------------------------------------------------------+

  0         16M                    896M                        2G
  +----------+-----------------------+--------------------------+
  | ZONE_DMA |      ZONE_NORMAL      |       ZONE_HIGHMEM       |
  +----------+-----------------------+--------------------------+


With a kernel built with ``ZONE_DMA`` disabled and ``ZONE_DMA32`` enabled and
booted with ``movablecore=80%`` parameter on an arm64 machine with 16 Gbytes of
RAM equally split between two nodes, there will be ``ZONE_DMA32``,
``ZONE_NORMAL`` and ``ZONE_MOVABLE`` on node 0, and ``ZONE_NORMAL`` and
``ZONE_MOVABLE`` on node 1::


  1G                                9G                         17G
  +--------------------------------+ +--------------------------+
  |              node 0            | |          node 1          |
  +--------------------------------+ +--------------------------+

  1G       4G        4200M          9G          9320M          17G
  +---------+----------+-----------+ +------------+-------------+
  |  DMA32  |  NORMAL  |  MOVABLE  | |   NORMAL   |   MOVABLE   |
  +---------+----------+-----------+ +------------+-------------+


Memory banks may belong to interleaving nodes. In the example below an x86
machine has 16 Gbytes of RAM in 4 memory banks, even banks belong to node 0
and odd banks belong to node 1::


  0              4G              8G             12G            16G
  +-------------+ +-------------+ +-------------+ +-------------+
  |    node 0   | |    node 1   | |    node 0   | |    node 1   |
  +-------------+ +-------------+ +-------------+ +-------------+

  0   16M      4G
  +-----+-------+ +-------------+ +-------------+ +-------------+
  | DMA | DMA32 | |    NORMAL   | |    NORMAL   | |    NORMAL   |
  +-----+-------+ +-------------+ +-------------+ +-------------+

In this case node 0 will span from 0 to 12 Gbytes and node 1 will span from
4 to 16 Gbytes.

.. _nodes:

Nodes
=====

As we have mentioned, each node in memory is described by a ``pg_data_t`` which
is a typedef for a ``struct pglist_data``. When allocating a page, by default
Linux uses a node-local allocation policy to allocate memory from the node
closest to the running CPU. As processes tend to run on the same CPU, it is
likely the memory from the current node will be used. The allocation policy can
be controlled by users as described in
Documentation/admin-guide/mm/numa_memory_policy.rst.

Most NUMA architectures maintain an array of pointers to the node
structures. The actual structures are allocated early during boot when
architecture specific code parses the physical memory map reported by the
firmware. The bulk of the node initialization happens slightly later in the
boot process by free_area_init() function, described later in Section
:ref:`Initialization <initialization>`.


Along with the node structures, kernel maintains an array of ``nodemask_t``
bitmasks called ``node_states``. Each bitmask in this array represents a set of
nodes with particular properties as defined by ``enum node_states``:

``N_POSSIBLE``
  The node could become online at some point.
``N_ONLINE``
  The node is online.
``N_NORMAL_MEMORY``
  The node has regular memory.
``N_HIGH_MEMORY``
  The node has regular or high memory. When ``CONFIG_HIGHMEM`` is disabled
  aliased to ``N_NORMAL_MEMORY``.
``N_MEMORY``
  The node has memory(regular, high, movable)
``N_CPU``
  The node has one or more CPUs

For each node that has a property described above, the bit corresponding to the
node ID in the ``node_states[<property>]`` bitmask is set.

For example, for node 2 with normal memory and CPUs, bit 2 will be set in ::

  node_states[N_POSSIBLE]
  node_states[N_ONLINE]
  node_states[N_NORMAL_MEMORY]
  node_states[N_HIGH_MEMORY]
  node_states[N_MEMORY]
  node_states[N_CPU]

For various operations possible with nodemasks please refer to
``include/linux/nodemask.h``.

Among other things, nodemasks are used to provide macros for node traversal,
namely ``for_each_node()`` and ``for_each_online_node()``.

For instance, to call a function foo() for each online node::

	for_each_online_node(nid) {
		pg_data_t *pgdat = NODE_DATA(nid);

		foo(pgdat);
	}

Node structure
--------------

The nodes structure ``struct pglist_data`` is declared in
``include/linux/mmzone.h``. Here we briefly describe fields of this
structure:

General
~~~~~~~

``node_zones``
  The zones for this node.  Not all of the zones may be populated, but it is
  the full list. It is referenced by this node's node_zonelists as well as
  other node's node_zonelists.

``node_zonelists``
  The list of all zones in all nodes. This list defines the order of zones
  that allocations are preferred from. The ``node_zonelists`` is set up by
  ``build_zonelists()`` in ``mm/page_alloc.c`` during the initialization of
  core memory management structures.

``nr_zones``
  Number of populated zones in this node.

``node_mem_map``
  For UMA systems that use FLATMEM memory model the 0's node
  ``node_mem_map`` is array of struct pages representing each physical frame.

``node_page_ext``
  For UMA systems that use FLATMEM memory model the 0's node
  ``node_page_ext`` is array of extensions of struct pages. Available only
  in the kernels built with ``CONFIG_PAGE_EXTENSION`` enabled.

``node_start_pfn``
  The page frame number of the starting page frame in this node.

``node_present_pages``
  Total number of physical pages present in this node.

``node_spanned_pages``
  Total size of physical page range, including holes.

``node_size_lock``
  A lock that protects the fields defining the node extents. Only defined when
  at least one of ``CONFIG_MEMORY_HOTPLUG`` or
  ``CONFIG_DEFERRED_STRUCT_PAGE_INIT`` configuration options are enabled.
  ``pgdat_resize_lock()`` and ``pgdat_resize_unlock()`` are provided to
  manipulate ``node_size_lock`` without checking for ``CONFIG_MEMORY_HOTPLUG``
  or ``CONFIG_DEFERRED_STRUCT_PAGE_INIT``.

``node_id``
  The Node ID (NID) of the node, starts at 0.

``totalreserve_pages``
  This is a per-node reserve of pages that are not available to userspace
  allocations.

``first_deferred_pfn``
  If memory initialization on large machines is deferred then this is the first
  PFN that needs to be initialized. Defined only when
  ``CONFIG_DEFERRED_STRUCT_PAGE_INIT`` is enabled

``deferred_split_queue``
  Per-node queue of huge pages that their split was deferred. Defined only when ``CONFIG_TRANSPARENT_HUGEPAGE`` is enabled.

``__lruvec``
  Per-node lruvec holding LRU lists and related parameters. Used only when
  memory cgroups are disabled. It should not be accessed directly, use
  ``mem_cgroup_lruvec()`` to look up lruvecs instead.

Reclaim control
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See also Documentation/mm/page_reclaim.rst.

``kswapd``
  Per-node instance of kswapd kernel thread.

``kswapd_wait``, ``pfmemalloc_wait``, ``reclaim_wait``
  Workqueues used to synchronize memory reclaim tasks

``nr_writeback_throttled``
  Number of tasks that are throttled waiting on dirty pages to clean.

``nr_reclaim_start``
  Number of pages written while reclaim is throttled waiting for writeback.

``kswapd_order``
  Controls the order kswapd tries to reclaim

``kswapd_highest_zoneidx``
  The highest zone index to be reclaimed by kswapd

``kswapd_failures``
  Number of runs kswapd was unable to reclaim any pages

``min_unmapped_pages``
  Minimal number of unmapped file backed pages that cannot be reclaimed.
  Determined by ``vm.min_unmapped_ratio`` sysctl. Only defined when
  ``CONFIG_NUMA`` is enabled.

``min_slab_pages``
  Minimal number of SLAB pages that cannot be reclaimed. Determined by
  ``vm.min_slab_ratio sysctl``. Only defined when ``CONFIG_NUMA`` is enabled

``flags``
  Flags controlling reclaim behavior.

Compaction control
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``kcompactd_max_order``
  Page order that kcompactd should try to achieve.

``kcompactd_highest_zoneidx``
  The highest zone index to be compacted by kcompactd.

``kcompactd_wait``
  Workqueue used to synchronize memory compaction tasks.

``kcompactd``
  Per-node instance of kcompactd kernel thread.

``proactive_compact_trigger``
  Determines if proactive compaction is enabled. Controlled by
  ``vm.compaction_proactiveness`` sysctl.

Statistics
~~~~~~~~~~

``per_cpu_nodestats``
  Per-CPU VM statistics for the node

``vm_stat``
  VM statistics for the node.

.. _zones:

Zones
=====

.. admonition:: Stub

   This section is incomplete. Please list and describe the appropriate fields.

.. _pages:

Pages
=====

.. admonition:: Stub

   This section is incomplete. Please list and describe the appropriate fields.

.. _folios:

Folios
======

.. admonition:: Stub

   This section is incomplete. Please list and describe the appropriate fields.

.. _initialization:

Initialization
==============

.. admonition:: Stub

   This section is incomplete. Please list and describe the appropriate fields.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=================
Process Addresses
=================
==============================
remap_file_pages() system call
==============================

The remap_file_pages() system call is used to create a nonlinear mapping,
that is, a mapping in which the pages of the file are mapped into a
nonsequential order in memory. The advantage of using remap_file_pages()
over using repeated calls to mmap(2) is that the former approach does not
require the kernel to create additional VMA (Virtual Memory Area) data
structures.

Supporting of nonlinear mapping requires significant amount of non-trivial
code in kernel virtual memory subsystem including hot paths. Also to get
nonlinear mapping work kernel need a way to distinguish normal page table
entries from entries with file offset (pte_file). Kernel reserves flag in
PTE for this purpose. PTE flags are scarce resource especially on some CPU
architectures. It would be nice to free up the flag for other usage.

Fortunately, there are not many users of remap_file_pages() in the wild.
It's only known that one enterprise RDBMS implementation uses the syscall
on 32-bit systems to map files bigger than can linearly fit into 32-bit
virtual address space. This use-case is not critical anymore since 64-bit
systems are widely available.

The syscall is deprecated and replaced it with an emulation now. The
emulation creates new VMAs instead of nonlinear mappings. It's going to
work slower for rare users of remap_file_pages() but ABI is preserved.

One side effect of emulation (apart from performance) is that user can hit
vm.max_map_count limit more easily due to additional VMAs. See comment for
DEFAULT_MAX_MAP_COUNT for more details on the limit.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

========================
Shared Memory Filesystem
========================
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

===============
Slab Allocation
===============
==========================
Short users guide for SLUB
==========================

The basic philosophy of SLUB is very different from SLAB. SLAB
requires rebuilding the kernel to activate debug options for all
slab caches. SLUB always includes full debugging but it is off by default.
SLUB can enable debugging only for selected slabs in order to avoid
an impact on overall system performance which may make a bug more
difficult to find.

In order to switch debugging on one can add an option ``slab_debug``
to the kernel command line. That will enable full debugging for
all slabs.

Typically one would then use the ``slabinfo`` command to get statistical
data and perform operation on the slabs. By default ``slabinfo`` only lists
slabs that have data in them. See "slabinfo -h" for more options when
running the command. ``slabinfo`` can be compiled with
::

	gcc -o slabinfo tools/mm/slabinfo.c

Some of the modes of operation of ``slabinfo`` require that slub debugging
be enabled on the command line. F.e. no tracking information will be
available without debugging on and validation can only partially
be performed if debugging was not switched on.

Some more sophisticated uses of slab_debug:
-------------------------------------------

Parameters may be given to ``slab_debug``. If none is specified then full
debugging is enabled. Format:

slab_debug=<Debug-Options>
	Enable options for all slabs

slab_debug=<Debug-Options>,<slab name1>,<slab name2>,...
	Enable options only for select slabs (no spaces
	after a comma)

Multiple blocks of options for all slabs or selected slabs can be given, with
blocks of options delimited by ';'. The last of "all slabs" blocks is applied
to all slabs except those that match one of the "select slabs" block. Options
of the first "select slabs" blocks that matches the slab's name are applied.

Possible debug options are::

	F		Sanity checks on (enables SLAB_DEBUG_CONSISTENCY_CHECKS
			Sorry SLAB legacy issues)
	Z		Red zoning
	P		Poisoning (object and padding)
	U		User tracking (free and alloc)
	T		Trace (please only use on single slabs)
	A		Enable failslab filter mark for the cache
	O		Switch debugging off for caches that would have
			caused higher minimum slab orders
	-		Switch all debugging off (useful if the kernel is
			configured with CONFIG_SLUB_DEBUG_ON)

F.e. in order to boot just with sanity checks and red zoning one would specify::

	slab_debug=FZ

Trying to find an issue in the dentry cache? Try::

	slab_debug=,dentry

to only enable debugging on the dentry cache.  You may use an asterisk at the
end of the slab name, in order to cover all slabs with the same prefix.  For
example, here's how you can poison the dentry cache as well as all kmalloc
slabs::

	slab_debug=P,kmalloc-*,dentry

Red zoning and tracking may realign the slab.  We can just apply sanity checks
to the dentry cache with::

	slab_debug=F,dentry

Debugging options may require the minimum possible slab order to increase as
a result of storing the metadata (for example, caches with PAGE_SIZE object
sizes).  This has a higher likelihood of resulting in slab allocation errors
in low memory situations or if there's high fragmentation of memory.  To
switch off debugging for such caches by default, use::

	slab_debug=O

You can apply different options to different list of slab names, using blocks
of options. This will enable red zoning for dentry and user tracking for
kmalloc. All other slabs will not get any debugging enabled::

	slab_debug=Z,dentry;U,kmalloc-*

You can also enable options (e.g. sanity checks and poisoning) for all caches
except some that are deemed too performance critical and don't need to be
debugged by specifying global debug options followed by a list of slab names
with "-" as options::

	slab_debug=FZ;-,zs_handle,zspage

The state of each debug option for a slab can be found in the respective files
under::

	/sys/kernel/slab/<slab name>/

If the file contains 1, the option is enabled, 0 means disabled. The debug
options from the ``slab_debug`` parameter translate to the following files::

	F	sanity_checks
	Z	red_zone
	P	poison
	U	store_user
	T	trace
	A	failslab

failslab file is writable, so writing 1 or 0 will enable or disable
the option at runtime. Write returns -EINVAL if cache is an alias.
Careful with tracing: It may spew out lots of information and never stop if
used on the wrong slab.

Slab merging
============

If no debug options are specified then SLUB may merge similar slabs together
in order to reduce overhead and increase cache hotness of objects.
``slabinfo -a`` displays which slabs were merged together.

Slab validation
===============

SLUB can validate all object if the kernel was booted with slab_debug. In
order to do so you must have the ``slabinfo`` tool. Then you can do
::

	slabinfo -v

which will test all objects. Output will be generated to the syslog.

This also works in a more limited way if boot was without slab debug.
In that case ``slabinfo -v`` simply tests all reachable objects. Usually
these are in the cpu slabs and the partial slabs. Full slabs are not
tracked by SLUB in a non debug situation.

Getting more performance
========================

To some degree SLUB's performance is limited by the need to take the
list_lock once in a while to deal with partial slabs. That overhead is
governed by the order of the allocation for each slab. The allocations
can be influenced by kernel parameters:

.. slab_min_objects=x		(default: automatically scaled by number of cpus)
.. slab_min_order=x		(default 0)
.. slab_max_order=x		(default 3 (PAGE_ALLOC_COSTLY_ORDER))

``slab_min_objects``
	allows to specify how many objects must at least fit into one
	slab in order for the allocation order to be acceptable.  In
	general slub will be able to perform this number of
	allocations on a slab without consulting centralized resources
	(list_lock) where contention may occur.

``slab_min_order``
	specifies a minimum order of slabs. A similar effect like
	``slab_min_objects``.

``slab_max_order``
	specified the order at which ``slab_min_objects`` should no
	longer be checked. This is useful to avoid SLUB trying to
	generate super large order pages to fit ``slab_min_objects``
	of a slab cache with large object sizes into one high order
	page. Setting command line parameter
	``debug_guardpage_minorder=N`` (N > 0), forces setting
	``slab_max_order`` to 0, what cause minimum possible order of
	slabs allocation.

SLUB Debug output
=================

Here is a sample of slub debug output::

 ====================================================================
 BUG kmalloc-8: Right Redzone overwritten
 --------------------------------------------------------------------

 INFO: 0xc90f6d28-0xc90f6d2b. First byte 0x00 instead of 0xcc
 INFO: Slab 0xc528c530 flags=0x400000c3 inuse=61 fp=0xc90f6d58
 INFO: Object 0xc90f6d20 @offset=3360 fp=0xc90f6d58
 INFO: Allocated in get_modalias+0x61/0xf5 age=53 cpu=1 pid=554

 Bytes b4 (0xc90f6d10): 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a ........ZZZZZZZZ
 Object   (0xc90f6d20): 31 30 31 39 2e 30 30 35                         1019.005
 Redzone  (0xc90f6d28): 00 cc cc cc                                     .
 Padding  (0xc90f6d50): 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a                         ZZZZZZZZ

   [<c010523d>] dump_trace+0x63/0x1eb
   [<c01053df>] show_trace_log_lvl+0x1a/0x2f
   [<c010601d>] show_trace+0x12/0x14
   [<c0106035>] dump_stack+0x16/0x18
   [<c017e0fa>] object_err+0x143/0x14b
   [<c017e2cc>] check_object+0x66/0x234
   [<c017eb43>] __slab_free+0x239/0x384
   [<c017f446>] kfree+0xa6/0xc6
   [<c02e2335>] get_modalias+0xb9/0xf5
   [<c02e23b7>] dmi_dev_uevent+0x27/0x3c
   [<c027866a>] dev_uevent+0x1ad/0x1da
   [<c0205024>] kobject_uevent_env+0x20a/0x45b
   [<c020527f>] kobject_uevent+0xa/0xf
   [<c02779f1>] store_uevent+0x4f/0x58
   [<c027758e>] dev_attr_store+0x29/0x2f
   [<c01bec4f>] sysfs_write_file+0x16e/0x19c
   [<c0183ba7>] vfs_write+0xd1/0x15a
   [<c01841d7>] sys_write+0x3d/0x72
   [<c0104112>] sysenter_past_esp+0x5f/0x99
   [<b7f7b410>] 0xb7f7b410
   =======================

 FIX kmalloc-8: Restoring Redzone 0xc90f6d28-0xc90f6d2b=0xcc

If SLUB encounters a corrupted object (full detection requires the kernel
to be booted with slab_debug) then the following output will be dumped
into the syslog:

1. Description of the problem encountered

   This will be a message in the system log starting with::

     ===============================================
     BUG <slab cache affected>: <What went wrong>
     -----------------------------------------------

     INFO: <corruption start>-<corruption_end> <more info>
     INFO: Slab <address> <slab information>
     INFO: Object <address> <object information>
     INFO: Allocated in <kernel function> age=<jiffies since alloc> cpu=<allocated by
	cpu> pid=<pid of the process>
     INFO: Freed in <kernel function> age=<jiffies since free> cpu=<freed by cpu>
	pid=<pid of the process>

   (Object allocation / free information is only available if SLAB_STORE_USER is
   set for the slab. slab_debug sets that option)

2. The object contents if an object was involved.

   Various types of lines can follow the BUG SLUB line:

   Bytes b4 <address> : <bytes>
	Shows a few bytes before the object where the problem was detected.
	Can be useful if the corruption does not stop with the start of the
	object.

   Object <address> : <bytes>
	The bytes of the object. If the object is inactive then the bytes
	typically contain poison values. Any non-poison value shows a
	corruption by a write after free.

   Redzone <address> : <bytes>
	The Redzone following the object. The Redzone is used to detect
	writes after the object. All bytes should always have the same
	value. If there is any deviation then it is due to a write after
	the object boundary.

	(Redzone information is only available if SLAB_RED_ZONE is set.
	slab_debug sets that option)

   Padding <address> : <bytes>
	Unused data to fill up the space in order to get the next object
	properly aligned. In the debug case we make sure that there are
	at least 4 bytes of padding. This allows the detection of writes
	before the object.

3. A stackdump

   The stackdump describes the location where the error was detected. The cause
   of the corruption is may be more likely found by looking at the function that
   allocated or freed the object.

4. Report on how the problem was dealt with in order to ensure the continued
   operation of the system.

   These are messages in the system log beginning with::

	FIX <slab cache affected>: <corrective action taken>

   In the above sample SLUB found that the Redzone of an active object has
   been overwritten. Here a string of 8 characters was written into a slab that
   has the length of 8 characters. However, a 8 character string needs a
   terminating 0. That zero has overwritten the first byte of the Redzone field.
   After reporting the details of the issue encountered the FIX SLUB message
   tells us that SLUB has restored the Redzone to its proper value and then
   system operations continue.

Emergency operations
====================

Minimal debugging (sanity checks alone) can be enabled by booting with::

	slab_debug=F

This will be generally be enough to enable the resiliency features of slub
which will keep the system running even if a bad kernel component will
keep corrupting objects. This may be important for production systems.
Performance will be impacted by the sanity checks and there will be a
continual stream of error messages to the syslog but no additional memory
will be used (unlike full debugging).

No guarantees. The kernel component still needs to be fixed. Performance
may be optimized further by locating the slab that experiences corruption
and enabling debugging only for that cache

I.e.::

	slab_debug=F,dentry

If the corruption occurs by writing after the end of the object then it
may be advisable to enable a Redzone to avoid corrupting the beginning
of other objects::

	slab_debug=FZ,dentry

Extended slabinfo mode and plotting
===================================

The ``slabinfo`` tool has a special 'extended' ('-X') mode that includes:
 - Slabcache Totals
 - Slabs sorted by size (up to -N <num> slabs, default 1)
 - Slabs sorted by loss (up to -N <num> slabs, default 1)

Additionally, in this mode ``slabinfo`` does not dynamically scale
sizes (G/M/K) and reports everything in bytes (this functionality is
also available to other slabinfo modes via '-B' option) which makes
reporting more precise and accurate. Moreover, in some sense the `-X'
mode also simplifies the analysis of slabs' behaviour, because its
output can be plotted using the ``slabinfo-gnuplot.sh`` script. So it
pushes the analysis from looking through the numbers (tons of numbers)
to something easier -- visual analysis.

To generate plots:

a) collect slabinfo extended records, for example::

	while [ 1 ]; do slabinfo -X >> FOO_STATS; sleep 1; done

b) pass stats file(-s) to ``slabinfo-gnuplot.sh`` script::

	slabinfo-gnuplot.sh FOO_STATS [FOO_STATS2 .. FOO_STATSN]

   The ``slabinfo-gnuplot.sh`` script will pre-processes the collected records
   and generates 3 png files (and 3 pre-processing cache files) per STATS
   file:
   - Slabcache Totals: FOO_STATS-totals.png
   - Slabs sorted by size: FOO_STATS-slabs-by-size.png
   - Slabs sorted by loss: FOO_STATS-slabs-by-loss.png

Another use case, when ``slabinfo-gnuplot.sh`` can be useful, is when you
need to compare slabs' behaviour "prior to" and "after" some code
modification.  To help you out there, ``slabinfo-gnuplot.sh`` script
can 'merge' the `Slabcache Totals` sections from different
measurements. To visually compare N plots:

a) Collect as many STATS1, STATS2, .. STATSN files as you need::

	while [ 1 ]; do slabinfo -X >> STATS<X>; sleep 1; done

b) Pre-process those STATS files::

	slabinfo-gnuplot.sh STATS1 STATS2 .. STATSN

c) Execute ``slabinfo-gnuplot.sh`` in '-t' mode, passing all of the
   generated pre-processed \*-totals::

	slabinfo-gnuplot.sh -t STATS1-totals STATS2-totals .. STATSN-totals

   This will produce a single plot (png file).

   Plots, expectedly, can be large so some fluctuations or small spikes
   can go unnoticed. To deal with that, ``slabinfo-gnuplot.sh`` has two
   options to 'zoom-in'/'zoom-out':

   a) ``-s %d,%d`` -- overwrites the default image width and height
   b) ``-r %d,%d`` -- specifies a range of samples to use (for example,
      in ``slabinfo -X >> FOO_STATS; sleep 1;`` case, using a ``-r
      40,60`` range will plot only samples collected between 40th and
      60th seconds).


DebugFS files for SLUB
======================

For more information about current state of SLUB caches with the user tracking
debug option enabled, debugfs files are available, typically under
/sys/kernel/debug/slab/<cache>/ (created only for caches with enabled user
tracking). There are 2 types of these files with the following debug
information:

1. alloc_traces::

    Prints information about unique allocation traces of the currently
    allocated objects. The output is sorted by frequency of each trace.

    Information in the output:
    Number of objects, allocating function, possible memory wastage of
    kmalloc objects(total/per-object), minimal/average/maximal jiffies
    since alloc, pid range of the allocating processes, cpu mask of
    allocating cpus, numa node mask of origins of memory, and stack trace.

    Example:::

    338 pci_alloc_dev+0x2c/0xa0 waste=521872/1544 age=290837/291891/293509 pid=1 cpus=106 nodes=0-1
        __kmem_cache_alloc_node+0x11f/0x4e0
        kmalloc_trace+0x26/0xa0
        pci_alloc_dev+0x2c/0xa0
        pci_scan_single_device+0xd2/0x150
        pci_scan_slot+0xf7/0x2d0
        pci_scan_child_bus_extend+0x4e/0x360
        acpi_pci_root_create+0x32e/0x3b0
        pci_acpi_scan_root+0x2b9/0x2d0
        acpi_pci_root_add.cold.11+0x110/0xb0a
        acpi_bus_attach+0x262/0x3f0
        device_for_each_child+0xb7/0x110
        acpi_dev_for_each_child+0x77/0xa0
        acpi_bus_attach+0x108/0x3f0
        device_for_each_child+0xb7/0x110
        acpi_dev_for_each_child+0x77/0xa0
        acpi_bus_attach+0x108/0x3f0

2. free_traces::

    Prints information about unique freeing traces of the currently allocated
    objects. The freeing traces thus come from the previous life-cycle of the
    objects and are reported as not available for objects allocated for the first
    time. The output is sorted by frequency of each trace.

    Information in the output:
    Number of objects, freeing function, minimal/average/maximal jiffies since free,
    pid range of the freeing processes, cpu mask of freeing cpus, and stack trace.

    Example:::

    1980 <not-available> age=4294912290 pid=0 cpus=0
    51 acpi_ut_update_ref_count+0x6a6/0x782 age=236886/237027/237772 pid=1 cpus=1
	kfree+0x2db/0x420
	acpi_ut_update_ref_count+0x6a6/0x782
	acpi_ut_update_object_reference+0x1ad/0x234
	acpi_ut_remove_reference+0x7d/0x84
	acpi_rs_get_prt_method_data+0x97/0xd6
	acpi_get_irq_routing_table+0x82/0xc4
	acpi_pci_irq_find_prt_entry+0x8e/0x2e0
	acpi_pci_irq_lookup+0x3a/0x1e0
	acpi_pci_irq_enable+0x77/0x240
	pcibios_enable_device+0x39/0x40
	do_pci_enable_device.part.0+0x5d/0xe0
	pci_enable_device_flags+0xfc/0x120
	pci_enable_device+0x13/0x20
	virtio_pci_probe+0x9e/0x170
	local_pci_probe+0x48/0x80
	pci_device_probe+0x105/0x1c0

Christoph Lameter, May 30, 2007
Sergey Senozhatsky, October 23, 2015
=====================
Split page table lock
=====================

Originally, mm->page_table_lock spinlock protected all page tables of the
mm_struct. But this approach leads to poor page fault scalability of
multi-threaded applications due high contention on the lock. To improve
scalability, split page table lock was introduced.

With split page table lock we have separate per-table lock to serialize
access to the table. At the moment we use split lock for PTE and PMD
tables. Access to higher level tables protected by mm->page_table_lock.

There are helpers to lock/unlock a table and other accessor functions:

 - pte_offset_map_lock()
	maps PTE and takes PTE table lock, returns pointer to PTE with
	pointer to its PTE table lock, or returns NULL if no PTE table;
 - pte_offset_map_nolock()
	maps PTE, returns pointer to PTE with pointer to its PTE table
	lock (not taken), or returns NULL if no PTE table;
 - pte_offset_map()
	maps PTE, returns pointer to PTE, or returns NULL if no PTE table;
 - pte_unmap()
	unmaps PTE table;
 - pte_unmap_unlock()
	unlocks and unmaps PTE table;
 - pte_alloc_map_lock()
	allocates PTE table if needed and takes its lock, returns pointer to
	PTE with pointer to its lock, or returns NULL if allocation failed;
 - pmd_lock()
	takes PMD table lock, returns pointer to taken lock;
 - pmd_lockptr()
	returns pointer to PMD table lock;

Split page table lock for PTE tables is enabled compile-time if
CONFIG_SPLIT_PTLOCK_CPUS (usually 4) is less or equal to NR_CPUS.
If split lock is disabled, all tables are guarded by mm->page_table_lock.

Split page table lock for PMD tables is enabled, if it's enabled for PTE
tables and the architecture supports it (see below).

Hugetlb and split page table lock
=================================

Hugetlb can support several page sizes. We use split lock only for PMD
level, but not for PUD.

Hugetlb-specific helpers:

 - huge_pte_lock()
	takes pmd split lock for PMD_SIZE page, mm->page_table_lock
	otherwise;
 - huge_pte_lockptr()
	returns pointer to table lock;

Support of split page table lock by an architecture
===================================================

There's no need in special enabling of PTE split page table lock: everything
required is done by pagetable_pte_ctor() and pagetable_pte_dtor(), which
must be called on PTE table allocation / freeing.

Make sure the architecture doesn't use slab allocator for page table
allocation: slab uses page->slab_cache for its pages.
This field shares storage with page->ptl.

PMD split lock only makes sense if you have more than two page table
levels.

PMD split lock enabling requires pagetable_pmd_ctor() call on PMD table
allocation and pagetable_pmd_dtor() on freeing.

Allocation usually happens in pmd_alloc_one(), freeing in pmd_free() and
pmd_free_tlb(), but make sure you cover all PMD table allocation / freeing
paths: i.e X86_PAE preallocate few PMDs on pgd_alloc().

With everything in place you can set CONFIG_ARCH_ENABLE_SPLIT_PMD_PTLOCK.

NOTE: pagetable_pte_ctor() and pagetable_pmd_ctor() can fail -- it must
be handled properly.

page->ptl
=========

page->ptl is used to access split page table lock, where 'page' is struct
page of page containing the table. It shares storage with page->private
(and few other fields in union).

To avoid increasing size of struct page and have best performance, we use a
trick:

 - if spinlock_t fits into long, we use page->ptr as spinlock, so we
   can avoid indirect access and save a cache line.
 - if size of spinlock_t is bigger then size of long, we use page->ptl as
   pointer to spinlock_t and allocate it dynamically. This allows to use
   split lock with enabled DEBUG_SPINLOCK or DEBUG_LOCK_ALLOC, but costs
   one more cache line for indirect access;

The spinlock_t allocated in pagetable_pte_ctor() for PTE table and in
pagetable_pmd_ctor() for PMD table.

Please, never access page->ptl directly -- use appropriate helper.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

====
Swap
====
============================
Transparent Hugepage Support
============================

This document describes design principles for Transparent Hugepage (THP)
support and its interaction with other parts of the memory management
system.

Design principles
=================

- "graceful fallback": mm components which don't have transparent hugepage
  knowledge fall back to breaking huge pmd mapping into table of ptes and,
  if necessary, split a transparent hugepage. Therefore these components
  can continue working on the regular pages or regular pte mappings.

- if a hugepage allocation fails because of memory fragmentation,
  regular pages should be gracefully allocated instead and mixed in
  the same vma without any failure or significant delay and without
  userland noticing

- if some task quits and more hugepages become available (either
  immediately in the buddy or through the VM), guest physical memory
  backed by regular pages should be relocated on hugepages
  automatically (with khugepaged)

- it doesn't require memory reservation and in turn it uses hugepages
  whenever possible (the only possible reservation here is kernelcore=
  to avoid unmovable pages to fragment all the memory but such a tweak
  is not specific to transparent hugepage support and it's a generic
  feature that applies to all dynamic high order allocations in the
  kernel)

get_user_pages and pin_user_pages
=================================

get_user_pages and pin_user_pages if run on a hugepage, will return the
head or tail pages as usual (exactly as they would do on
hugetlbfs). Most GUP users will only care about the actual physical
address of the page and its temporary pinning to release after the I/O
is complete, so they won't ever notice the fact the page is huge. But
if any driver is going to mangle over the page structure of the tail
page (like for checking page->mapping or other bits that are relevant
for the head page and not the tail page), it should be updated to jump
to check head page instead. Taking a reference on any head/tail page would
prevent the page from being split by anyone.

.. note::
   these aren't new constraints to the GUP API, and they match the
   same constraints that apply to hugetlbfs too, so any driver capable
   of handling GUP on hugetlbfs will also work fine on transparent
   hugepage backed mappings.

Graceful fallback
=================

Code walking pagetables but unaware about huge pmds can simply call
split_huge_pmd(vma, pmd, addr) where the pmd is the one returned by
pmd_offset. It's trivial to make the code transparent hugepage aware
by just grepping for "pmd_offset" and adding split_huge_pmd where
missing after pmd_offset returns the pmd. Thanks to the graceful
fallback design, with a one liner change, you can avoid to write
hundreds if not thousands of lines of complex code to make your code
hugepage aware.

If you're not walking pagetables but you run into a physical hugepage
that you can't handle natively in your code, you can split it by
calling split_huge_page(page). This is what the Linux VM does before
it tries to swapout the hugepage for example. split_huge_page() can fail
if the page is pinned and you must handle this correctly.

Example to make mremap.c transparent hugepage aware with a one liner
change::

	diff --git a/mm/mremap.c b/mm/mremap.c
	--- a/mm/mremap.c
	+++ b/mm/mremap.c
	@@ -41,6 +41,7 @@ static pmd_t *get_old_pmd(struct mm_stru
			return NULL;

		pmd = pmd_offset(pud, addr);
	+	split_huge_pmd(vma, pmd, addr);
		if (pmd_none_or_clear_bad(pmd))
			return NULL;

Locking in hugepage aware code
==============================

We want as much code as possible hugepage aware, as calling
split_huge_page() or split_huge_pmd() has a cost.

To make pagetable walks huge pmd aware, all you need to do is to call
pmd_trans_huge() on the pmd returned by pmd_offset. You must hold the
mmap_lock in read (or write) mode to be sure a huge pmd cannot be
created from under you by khugepaged (khugepaged collapse_huge_page
takes the mmap_lock in write mode in addition to the anon_vma lock). If
pmd_trans_huge returns false, you just fallback in the old code
paths. If instead pmd_trans_huge returns true, you have to take the
page table lock (pmd_lock()) and re-run pmd_trans_huge. Taking the
page table lock will prevent the huge pmd being converted into a
regular pmd from under you (split_huge_pmd can run in parallel to the
pagetable walk). If the second pmd_trans_huge returns false, you
should just drop the page table lock and fallback to the old code as
before. Otherwise, you can proceed to process the huge pmd and the
hugepage natively. Once finished, you can drop the page table lock.

Refcounts and transparent huge pages
====================================

Refcounting on THP is mostly consistent with refcounting on other compound
pages:

  - get_page()/put_page() and GUP operate on the folio->_refcount.

  - ->_refcount in tail pages is always zero: get_page_unless_zero() never
    succeeds on tail pages.

  - map/unmap of a PMD entry for the whole THP increment/decrement
    folio->_entire_mapcount, increment/decrement folio->_large_mapcount
    and also increment/decrement folio->_nr_pages_mapped by ENTIRELY_MAPPED
    when _entire_mapcount goes from -1 to 0 or 0 to -1.

  - map/unmap of individual pages with PTE entry increment/decrement
    page->_mapcount, increment/decrement folio->_large_mapcount and also
    increment/decrement folio->_nr_pages_mapped when page->_mapcount goes
    from -1 to 0 or 0 to -1 as this counts the number of pages mapped by PTE.

split_huge_page internally has to distribute the refcounts in the head
page to the tail pages before clearing all PG_head/tail bits from the page
structures. It can be done easily for refcounts taken by page table
entries, but we don't have enough information on how to distribute any
additional pins (i.e. from get_user_pages). split_huge_page() fails any
requests to split pinned huge pages: it expects page count to be equal to
the sum of mapcount of all sub-pages plus one (split_huge_page caller must
have a reference to the head page).

split_huge_page uses migration entries to stabilize page->_refcount and
page->_mapcount of anonymous pages. File pages just get unmapped.

We are safe against physical memory scanners too: the only legitimate way
a scanner can get a reference to a page is get_page_unless_zero().

All tail pages have zero ->_refcount until atomic_add(). This prevents the
scanner from getting a reference to the tail page up to that point. After the
atomic_add() we don't care about the ->_refcount value. We already know how
many references should be uncharged from the head page.

For head page get_page_unless_zero() will succeed and we don't mind. It's
clear where references should go after split: it will stay on the head page.

Note that split_huge_pmd() doesn't have any limitations on refcounting:
pmd can be split at any point and never fails.

Partial unmap and deferred_split_folio()
========================================

Unmapping part of THP (with munmap() or other way) is not going to free
memory immediately. Instead, we detect that a subpage of THP is not in use
in folio_remove_rmap_*() and queue the THP for splitting if memory pressure
comes. Splitting will free up unused subpages.

Splitting the page right away is not an option due to locking context in
the place where we can detect partial unmap. It also might be
counterproductive since in many cases partial unmap happens during exit(2) if
a THP crosses a VMA boundary.

The function deferred_split_folio() is used to queue a folio for splitting.
The splitting itself will happen when we get memory pressure via shrinker
interface.
==============================
Unevictable LRU Infrastructure
==============================

.. contents:: :local:


Introduction
============

This document describes the Linux memory manager's "Unevictable LRU"
infrastructure and the use of this to manage several types of "unevictable"
folios.

The document attempts to provide the overall rationale behind this mechanism
and the rationale for some of the design decisions that drove the
implementation.  The latter design rationale is discussed in the context of an
implementation description.  Admittedly, one can obtain the implementation
details - the "what does it do?" - by reading the code.  One hopes that the
descriptions below add value by provide the answer to "why does it do that?".



The Unevictable LRU
===================

The Unevictable LRU facility adds an additional LRU list to track unevictable
folios and to hide these folios from vmscan.  This mechanism is based on a patch
by Larry Woodman of Red Hat to address several scalability problems with folio
reclaim in Linux.  The problems have been observed at customer sites on large
memory x86_64 systems.

To illustrate this with an example, a non-NUMA x86_64 platform with 128GB of
main memory will have over 32 million 4k pages in a single node.  When a large
fraction of these pages are not evictable for any reason [see below], vmscan
will spend a lot of time scanning the LRU lists looking for the small fraction
of pages that are evictable.  This can result in a situation where all CPUs are
spending 100% of their time in vmscan for hours or days on end, with the system
completely unresponsive.

The unevictable list addresses the following classes of unevictable pages:

 * Those owned by ramfs.

 * Those owned by tmpfs with the noswap mount option.

 * Those mapped into SHM_LOCK'd shared memory regions.

 * Those mapped into VM_LOCKED [mlock()ed] VMAs.

The infrastructure may also be able to handle other conditions that make pages
unevictable, either by definition or by circumstance, in the future.


The Unevictable LRU Folio List
------------------------------

The Unevictable LRU folio list is a lie.  It was never an LRU-ordered
list, but a companion to the LRU-ordered anonymous and file, active and
inactive folio lists; and now it is not even a folio list.  But following
familiar convention, here in this document and in the source, we often
imagine it as a fifth LRU folio list.

The Unevictable LRU infrastructure consists of an additional, per-node, LRU list
called the "unevictable" list and an associated folio flag, PG_unevictable, to
indicate that the folio is being managed on the unevictable list.

The PG_unevictable flag is analogous to, and mutually exclusive with, the
PG_active flag in that it indicates on which LRU list a folio resides when
PG_lru is set.

The Unevictable LRU infrastructure maintains unevictable folios as if they were
on an additional LRU list for a few reasons:

 (1) We get to "treat unevictable folios just like we treat other folios in the
     system - which means we get to use the same code to manipulate them, the
     same code to isolate them (for migrate, etc.), the same code to keep track
     of the statistics, etc..." [Rik van Riel]

 (2) We want to be able to migrate unevictable folios between nodes for memory
     defragmentation, workload management and memory hotplug.  The Linux kernel
     can only migrate folios that it can successfully isolate from the LRU
     lists (or "Movable" folios: outside of consideration here).  If we were to
     maintain folios elsewhere than on an LRU-like list, where they can be
     detected by folio_isolate_lru(), we would prevent their migration.

The unevictable list does not differentiate between file-backed and
anonymous, swap-backed folios.  This differentiation is only important
while the folios are, in fact, evictable.

The unevictable list benefits from the "arrayification" of the per-node LRU
lists and statistics originally proposed and posted by Christoph Lameter.


Memory Control Group Interaction
--------------------------------

The unevictable LRU facility interacts with the memory control group [aka
memory controller; see Documentation/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/memory.rst] by
extending the lru_list enum.

The memory controller data structure automatically gets a per-node unevictable
list as a result of the "arrayification" of the per-node LRU lists (one per
lru_list enum element).  The memory controller tracks the movement of pages to
and from the unevictable list.

When a memory control group comes under memory pressure, the controller will
not attempt to reclaim pages on the unevictable list.  This has a couple of
effects:

 (1) Because the pages are "hidden" from reclaim on the unevictable list, the
     reclaim process can be more efficient, dealing only with pages that have a
     chance of being reclaimed.

 (2) On the other hand, if too many of the pages charged to the control group
     are unevictable, the evictable portion of the working set of the tasks in
     the control group may not fit into the available memory.  This can cause
     the control group to thrash or to OOM-kill tasks.


.. _mark_addr_space_unevict:

Marking Address Spaces Unevictable
----------------------------------

For facilities such as ramfs none of the pages attached to the address space
may be evicted.  To prevent eviction of any such pages, the AS_UNEVICTABLE
address space flag is provided, and this can be manipulated by a filesystem
using a number of wrapper functions:

 * ``void mapping_set_unevictable(struct address_space *mapping);``

	Mark the address space as being completely unevictable.

 * ``void mapping_clear_unevictable(struct address_space *mapping);``

	Mark the address space as being evictable.

 * ``int mapping_unevictable(struct address_space *mapping);``

	Query the address space, and return true if it is completely
	unevictable.

These are currently used in three places in the kernel:

 (1) By ramfs to mark the address spaces of its inodes when they are created,
     and this mark remains for the life of the inode.

 (2) By SYSV SHM to mark SHM_LOCK'd address spaces until SHM_UNLOCK is called.
     Note that SHM_LOCK is not required to page in the locked pages if they're
     swapped out; the application must touch the pages manually if it wants to
     ensure they're in memory.

 (3) By the i915 driver to mark pinned address space until it's unpinned. The
     amount of unevictable memory marked by i915 driver is roughly the bounded
     object size in debugfs/dri/0/i915_gem_objects.


Detecting Unevictable Pages
---------------------------

The function folio_evictable() in mm/internal.h determines whether a folio is
evictable or not using the query function outlined above [see section
:ref:`Marking address spaces unevictable <mark_addr_space_unevict>`]
to check the AS_UNEVICTABLE flag.

For address spaces that are so marked after being populated (as SHM regions
might be), the lock action (e.g. SHM_LOCK) can be lazy, and need not populate
the page tables for the region as does, for example, mlock(), nor need it make
any special effort to push any pages in the SHM_LOCK'd area to the unevictable
list.  Instead, vmscan will do this if and when it encounters the folios during
a reclamation scan.

On an unlock action (such as SHM_UNLOCK), the unlocker (e.g. shmctl()) must scan
the pages in the region and "rescue" them from the unevictable list if no other
condition is keeping them unevictable.  If an unevictable region is destroyed,
the pages are also "rescued" from the unevictable list in the process of
freeing them.

folio_evictable() also checks for mlocked folios by calling
folio_test_mlocked(), which is set when a folio is faulted into a
VM_LOCKED VMA, or found in a VMA being VM_LOCKED.


Vmscan's Handling of Unevictable Folios
---------------------------------------

If unevictable folios are culled in the fault path, or moved to the unevictable
list at mlock() or mmap() time, vmscan will not encounter the folios until they
have become evictable again (via munlock() for example) and have been "rescued"
from the unevictable list.  However, there may be situations where we decide,
for the sake of expediency, to leave an unevictable folio on one of the regular
active/inactive LRU lists for vmscan to deal with.  vmscan checks for such
folios in all of the shrink_{active|inactive|folio}_list() functions and will
"cull" such folios that it encounters: that is, it diverts those folios to the
unevictable list for the memory cgroup and node being scanned.

There may be situations where a folio is mapped into a VM_LOCKED VMA,
but the folio does not have the mlocked flag set.  Such folios will make
it all the way to shrink_active_list() or shrink_folio_list() where they
will be detected when vmscan walks the reverse map in folio_referenced()
or try_to_unmap().  The folio is culled to the unevictable list when it
is released by the shrinker.

To "cull" an unevictable folio, vmscan simply puts the folio back on
the LRU list using folio_putback_lru() - the inverse operation to
folio_isolate_lru() - after dropping the folio lock.  Because the
condition which makes the folio unevictable may change once the folio
is unlocked, __pagevec_lru_add_fn() will recheck the unevictable state
of a folio before placing it on the unevictable list.


MLOCKED Pages
=============

The unevictable folio list is also useful for mlock(), in addition to ramfs and
SYSV SHM.  Note that mlock() is only available in CONFIG_MMU=y situations; in
NOMMU situations, all mappings are effectively mlocked.


History
-------

The "Unevictable mlocked Pages" infrastructure is based on work originally
posted by Nick Piggin in an RFC patch entitled "mm: mlocked pages off LRU".
Nick posted his patch as an alternative to a patch posted by Christoph Lameter
to achieve the same objective: hiding mlocked pages from vmscan.

In Nick's patch, he used one of the struct page LRU list link fields as a count
of VM_LOCKED VMAs that map the page (Rik van Riel had the same idea three years
earlier).  But this use of the link field for a count prevented the management
of the pages on an LRU list, and thus mlocked pages were not migratable as
folio_isolate_lru() could not detect them, and the LRU list link field was not
available to the migration subsystem.

Nick resolved this by putting mlocked pages back on the LRU list before
attempting to isolate them, thus abandoning the count of VM_LOCKED VMAs.  When
Nick's patch was integrated with the Unevictable LRU work, the count was
replaced by walking the reverse map when munlocking, to determine whether any
other VM_LOCKED VMAs still mapped the page.

However, walking the reverse map for each page when munlocking was ugly and
inefficient, and could lead to catastrophic contention on a file's rmap lock,
when many processes which had it mlocked were trying to exit.  In 5.18, the
idea of keeping mlock_count in Unevictable LRU list link field was revived and
put to work, without preventing the migration of mlocked pages.  This is why
the "Unevictable LRU list" cannot be a linked list of pages now; but there was
no use for that linked list anyway - though its size is maintained for meminfo.


Basic Management
----------------

mlocked pages - pages mapped into a VM_LOCKED VMA - are a class of unevictable
pages.  When such a page has been "noticed" by the memory management subsystem,
the folio is marked with the PG_mlocked flag.  This can be manipulated using
folio_set_mlocked() and folio_clear_mlocked() functions.

A PG_mlocked page will be placed on the unevictable list when it is added to
the LRU.  Such pages can be "noticed" by memory management in several places:

 (1) in the mlock()/mlock2()/mlockall() system call handlers;

 (2) in the mmap() system call handler when mmapping a region with the
     MAP_LOCKED flag;

 (3) mmapping a region in a task that has called mlockall() with the MCL_FUTURE
     flag;

 (4) in the fault path and when a VM_LOCKED stack segment is expanded; or

 (5) as mentioned above, in vmscan:shrink_folio_list() when attempting to
     reclaim a page in a VM_LOCKED VMA by folio_referenced() or try_to_unmap().

mlocked pages become unlocked and rescued from the unevictable list when:

 (1) mapped in a range unlocked via the munlock()/munlockall() system calls;

 (2) munmap()'d out of the last VM_LOCKED VMA that maps the page, including
     unmapping at task exit;

 (3) when the page is truncated from the last VM_LOCKED VMA of an mmapped file;
     or

 (4) before a page is COW'd in a VM_LOCKED VMA.


mlock()/mlock2()/mlockall() System Call Handling
------------------------------------------------

mlock(), mlock2() and mlockall() system call handlers proceed to mlock_fixup()
for each VMA in the range specified by the call.  In the case of mlockall(),
this is the entire active address space of the task.  Note that mlock_fixup()
is used for both mlocking and munlocking a range of memory.  A call to mlock()
an already VM_LOCKED VMA, or to munlock() a VMA that is not VM_LOCKED, is
treated as a no-op and mlock_fixup() simply returns.

If the VMA passes some filtering as described in "Filtering Special VMAs"
below, mlock_fixup() will attempt to merge the VMA with its neighbors or split
off a subset of the VMA if the range does not cover the entire VMA.  Any pages
already present in the VMA are then marked as mlocked by mlock_folio() via
mlock_pte_range() via walk_page_range() via mlock_vma_pages_range().

Before returning from the system call, do_mlock() or mlockall() will call
__mm_populate() to fault in the remaining pages via get_user_pages() and to
mark those pages as mlocked as they are faulted.

Note that the VMA being mlocked might be mapped with PROT_NONE.  In this case,
get_user_pages() will be unable to fault in the pages.  That's okay.  If pages
do end up getting faulted into this VM_LOCKED VMA, they will be handled in the
fault path - which is also how mlock2()'s MLOCK_ONFAULT areas are handled.

For each PTE (or PMD) being faulted into a VMA, the page add rmap function
calls mlock_vma_folio(), which calls mlock_folio() when the VMA is VM_LOCKED
(unless it is a PTE mapping of a part of a transparent huge page).  Or when
it is a newly allocated anonymous page, folio_add_lru_vma() calls
mlock_new_folio() instead: similar to mlock_folio(), but can make better
judgments, since this page is held exclusively and known not to be on LRU yet.

mlock_folio() sets PG_mlocked immediately, then places the page on the CPU's
mlock folio batch, to batch up the rest of the work to be done under lru_lock by
__mlock_folio().  __mlock_folio() sets PG_unevictable, initializes mlock_count
and moves the page to unevictable state ("the unevictable LRU", but with
mlock_count in place of LRU threading).  Or if the page was already PG_lru
and PG_unevictable and PG_mlocked, it simply increments the mlock_count.

But in practice that may not work ideally: the page may not yet be on an LRU, or
it may have been temporarily isolated from LRU.  In such cases the mlock_count
field cannot be touched, but will be set to 0 later when __munlock_folio()
returns the page to "LRU".  Races prohibit mlock_count from being set to 1 then:
rather than risk stranding a page indefinitely as unevictable, always err with
mlock_count on the low side, so that when munlocked the page will be rescued to
an evictable LRU, then perhaps be mlocked again later if vmscan finds it in a
VM_LOCKED VMA.


Filtering Special VMAs
----------------------

mlock_fixup() filters several classes of "special" VMAs:

1) VMAs with VM_IO or VM_PFNMAP set are skipped entirely.  The pages behind
   these mappings are inherently pinned, so we don't need to mark them as
   mlocked.  In any case, most of the pages have no struct page in which to so
   mark the page.  Because of this, get_user_pages() will fail for these VMAs,
   so there is no sense in attempting to visit them.

2) VMAs mapping hugetlbfs page are already effectively pinned into memory.  We
   neither need nor want to mlock() these pages.  But __mm_populate() includes
   hugetlbfs ranges, allocating the huge pages and populating the PTEs.

3) VMAs with VM_DONTEXPAND are generally userspace mappings of kernel pages,
   such as the VDSO page, relay channel pages, etc.  These pages are inherently
   unevictable and are not managed on the LRU lists.  __mm_populate() includes
   these ranges, populating the PTEs if not already populated.

4) VMAs with VM_MIXEDMAP set are not marked VM_LOCKED, but __mm_populate()
   includes these ranges, populating the PTEs if not already populated.

Note that for all of these special VMAs, mlock_fixup() does not set the
VM_LOCKED flag.  Therefore, we won't have to deal with them later during
munlock(), munmap() or task exit.  Neither does mlock_fixup() account these
VMAs against the task's "locked_vm".


munlock()/munlockall() System Call Handling
-------------------------------------------

The munlock() and munlockall() system calls are handled by the same
mlock_fixup() function as mlock(), mlock2() and mlockall() system calls are.
If called to munlock an already munlocked VMA, mlock_fixup() simply returns.
Because of the VMA filtering discussed above, VM_LOCKED will not be set in
any "special" VMAs.  So, those VMAs will be ignored for munlock.

If the VMA is VM_LOCKED, mlock_fixup() again attempts to merge or split off the
specified range.  All pages in the VMA are then munlocked by munlock_folio() via
mlock_pte_range() via walk_page_range() via mlock_vma_pages_range() - the same
function used when mlocking a VMA range, with new flags for the VMA indicating
that it is munlock() being performed.

munlock_folio() uses the mlock pagevec to batch up work to be done
under lru_lock by  __munlock_folio().  __munlock_folio() decrements the
folio's mlock_count, and when that reaches 0 it clears the mlocked flag
and clears the unevictable flag, moving the folio from unevictable state
to the inactive LRU.

But in practice that may not work ideally: the folio may not yet have reached
"the unevictable LRU", or it may have been temporarily isolated from it.  In
those cases its mlock_count field is unusable and must be assumed to be 0: so
that the folio will be rescued to an evictable LRU, then perhaps be mlocked
again later if vmscan finds it in a VM_LOCKED VMA.


Migrating MLOCKED Pages
-----------------------

A page that is being migrated has been isolated from the LRU lists and is held
locked across unmapping of the page, updating the page's address space entry
and copying the contents and state, until the page table entry has been
replaced with an entry that refers to the new page.  Linux supports migration
of mlocked pages and other unevictable pages.  PG_mlocked is cleared from the
the old page when it is unmapped from the last VM_LOCKED VMA, and set when the
new page is mapped in place of migration entry in a VM_LOCKED VMA.  If the page
was unevictable because mlocked, PG_unevictable follows PG_mlocked; but if the
page was unevictable for other reasons, PG_unevictable is copied explicitly.

Note that page migration can race with mlocking or munlocking of the same page.
There is mostly no problem since page migration requires unmapping all PTEs of
the old page (including munlock where VM_LOCKED), then mapping in the new page
(including mlock where VM_LOCKED).  The page table locks provide sufficient
synchronization.

However, since mlock_vma_pages_range() starts by setting VM_LOCKED on a VMA,
before mlocking any pages already present, if one of those pages were migrated
before mlock_pte_range() reached it, it would get counted twice in mlock_count.
To prevent that, mlock_vma_pages_range() temporarily marks the VMA as VM_IO,
so that mlock_vma_folio() will skip it.

To complete page migration, we place the old and new pages back onto the LRU
afterwards.  The "unneeded" page - old page on success, new page on failure -
is freed when the reference count held by the migration process is released.


Compacting MLOCKED Pages
------------------------

The memory map can be scanned for compactable regions and the default behavior
is to let unevictable pages be moved.  /proc/sys/vm/compact_unevictable_allowed
controls this behavior (see Documentation/admin-guide/sysctl/vm.rst).  The work
of compaction is mostly handled by the page migration code and the same work
flow as described in Migrating MLOCKED Pages will apply.


MLOCKING Transparent Huge Pages
-------------------------------

A transparent huge page is represented by a single entry on an LRU list.
Therefore, we can only make unevictable an entire compound page, not
individual subpages.

If a user tries to mlock() part of a huge page, and no user mlock()s the
whole of the huge page, we want the rest of the page to be reclaimable.

We cannot just split the page on partial mlock() as split_huge_page() can
fail and a new intermittent failure mode for the syscall is undesirable.

We handle this by keeping PTE-mlocked huge pages on evictable LRU lists:
the PMD on the border of a VM_LOCKED VMA will be split into a PTE table.

This way the huge page is accessible for vmscan.  Under memory pressure the
page will be split, subpages which belong to VM_LOCKED VMAs will be moved
to the unevictable LRU and the rest can be reclaimed.

/proc/meminfo's Unevictable and Mlocked amounts do not include those parts
of a transparent huge page which are mapped only by PTEs in VM_LOCKED VMAs.


mmap(MAP_LOCKED) System Call Handling
-------------------------------------

In addition to the mlock(), mlock2() and mlockall() system calls, an application
can request that a region of memory be mlocked by supplying the MAP_LOCKED flag
to the mmap() call.  There is one important and subtle difference here, though.
mmap() + mlock() will fail if the range cannot be faulted in (e.g. because
mm_populate fails) and returns with ENOMEM while mmap(MAP_LOCKED) will not fail.
The mmapped area will still have properties of the locked area - pages will not
get swapped out - but major page faults to fault memory in might still happen.

Furthermore, any mmap() call or brk() call that expands the heap by a task
that has previously called mlockall() with the MCL_FUTURE flag will result
in the newly mapped memory being mlocked.  Before the unevictable/mlock
changes, the kernel simply called make_pages_present() to allocate pages
and populate the page table.

To mlock a range of memory under the unevictable/mlock infrastructure,
the mmap() handler and task address space expansion functions call
populate_vma_page_range() specifying the vma and the address range to mlock.


munmap()/exit()/exec() System Call Handling
-------------------------------------------

When unmapping an mlocked region of memory, whether by an explicit call to
munmap() or via an internal unmap from exit() or exec() processing, we must
munlock the pages if we're removing the last VM_LOCKED VMA that maps the pages.
Before the unevictable/mlock changes, mlocking did not mark the pages in any
way, so unmapping them required no processing.

For each PTE (or PMD) being unmapped from a VMA, folio_remove_rmap_*() calls
munlock_vma_folio(), which calls munlock_folio() when the VMA is VM_LOCKED
(unless it was a PTE mapping of a part of a transparent huge page).

munlock_folio() uses the mlock pagevec to batch up work to be done
under lru_lock by  __munlock_folio().  __munlock_folio() decrements the
folio's mlock_count, and when that reaches 0 it clears the mlocked flag
and clears the unevictable flag, moving the folio from unevictable state
to the inactive LRU.

But in practice that may not work ideally: the folio may not yet have reached
"the unevictable LRU", or it may have been temporarily isolated from it.  In
those cases its mlock_count field is unusable and must be assumed to be 0: so
that the folio will be rescued to an evictable LRU, then perhaps be mlocked
again later if vmscan finds it in a VM_LOCKED VMA.


Truncating MLOCKED Pages
------------------------

File truncation or hole punching forcibly unmaps the deleted pages from
userspace; truncation even unmaps and deletes any private anonymous pages
which had been Copied-On-Write from the file pages now being truncated.

Mlocked pages can be munlocked and deleted in this way: like with munmap(),
for each PTE (or PMD) being unmapped from a VMA, folio_remove_rmap_*() calls
munlock_vma_folio(), which calls munlock_folio() when the VMA is VM_LOCKED
(unless it was a PTE mapping of a part of a transparent huge page).

However, if there is a racing munlock(), since mlock_vma_pages_range() starts
munlocking by clearing VM_LOCKED from a VMA, before munlocking all the pages
present, if one of those pages were unmapped by truncation or hole punch before
mlock_pte_range() reached it, it would not be recognized as mlocked by this VMA,
and would not be counted out of mlock_count.  In this rare case, a page may
still appear as PG_mlocked after it has been fully unmapped: and it is left to
release_pages() (or __page_cache_release()) to clear it and update statistics
before freeing (this event is counted in /proc/vmstat unevictable_pgs_cleared,
which is usually 0).


Page Reclaim in shrink_*_list()
-------------------------------

vmscan's shrink_active_list() culls any obviously unevictable pages -
i.e. !page_evictable(page) pages - diverting those to the unevictable list.
However, shrink_active_list() only sees unevictable pages that made it onto the
active/inactive LRU lists.  Note that these pages do not have PG_unevictable
set - otherwise they would be on the unevictable list and shrink_active_list()
would never see them.

Some examples of these unevictable pages on the LRU lists are:

 (1) ramfs pages that have been placed on the LRU lists when first allocated.

 (2) SHM_LOCK'd shared memory pages.  shmctl(SHM_LOCK) does not attempt to
     allocate or fault in the pages in the shared memory region.  This happens
     when an application accesses the page the first time after SHM_LOCK'ing
     the segment.

 (3) pages still mapped into VM_LOCKED VMAs, which should be marked mlocked,
     but events left mlock_count too low, so they were munlocked too early.

vmscan's shrink_inactive_list() and shrink_folio_list() also divert obviously
unevictable pages found on the inactive lists to the appropriate memory cgroup
and node unevictable list.

rmap's folio_referenced_one(), called via vmscan's shrink_active_list() or
shrink_folio_list(), and rmap's try_to_unmap_one() called via shrink_folio_list(),
check for (3) pages still mapped into VM_LOCKED VMAs, and call mlock_vma_folio()
to correct them.  Such pages are culled to the unevictable list when released
by the shrinker.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

======================================
Virtually Contiguous Memory Allocation
======================================
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=====================================
Virtually Mapped Kernel Stack Support
=====================================

:Author: Shuah Khan <skhan@linuxfoundation.org>

.. contents:: :local:

Overview
--------

This is a compilation of information from the code and original patch
series that introduced the `Virtually Mapped Kernel Stacks feature
<https://lwn.net/Articles/694348/>`

Introduction
------------

Kernel stack overflows are often hard to debug and make the kernel
susceptible to exploits. Problems could show up at a later time making
it difficult to isolate and root-cause.

Virtually mapped kernel stacks with guard pages cause kernel stack
overflows to be caught immediately rather than causing difficult to
diagnose corruptions.

HAVE_ARCH_VMAP_STACK and VMAP_STACK configuration options enable
support for virtually mapped stacks with guard pages. This feature
causes reliable faults when the stack overflows. The usability of
the stack trace after overflow and response to the overflow itself
is architecture dependent.

.. note::
        As of this writing, arm64, powerpc, riscv, s390, um, and x86 have
        support for VMAP_STACK.

HAVE_ARCH_VMAP_STACK
--------------------

Architectures that can support Virtually Mapped Kernel Stacks should
enable this bool configuration option. The requirements are:

- vmalloc space must be large enough to hold many kernel stacks. This
  may rule out many 32-bit architectures.
- Stacks in vmalloc space need to work reliably.  For example, if
  vmap page tables are created on demand, either this mechanism
  needs to work while the stack points to a virtual address with
  unpopulated page tables or arch code (switch_to() and switch_mm(),
  most likely) needs to ensure that the stack's page table entries
  are populated before running on a possibly unpopulated stack.
- If the stack overflows into a guard page, something reasonable
  should happen. The definition of "reasonable" is flexible, but
  instantly rebooting without logging anything would be unfriendly.

VMAP_STACK
----------

When enabled, the VMAP_STACK bool configuration option allocates virtually
mapped task stacks. This option depends on HAVE_ARCH_VMAP_STACK.

- Enable this if you want the use virtually-mapped kernel stacks
  with guard pages. This causes kernel stack overflows to be caught
  immediately rather than causing difficult-to-diagnose corruption.

.. note::

        Using this feature with KASAN requires architecture support
        for backing virtual mappings with real shadow memory, and
        KASAN_VMALLOC must be enabled.

.. note::

        VMAP_STACK is enabled, it is not possible to run DMA on stack
        allocated data.

Kernel configuration options and dependencies keep changing. Refer to
the latest code base:

`Kconfig <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/arch/Kconfig>`

Allocation
-----------

When a new kernel thread is created, a thread stack is allocated from
virtually contiguous memory pages from the page level allocator. These
pages are mapped into contiguous kernel virtual space with PAGE_KERNEL
protections.

alloc_thread_stack_node() calls __vmalloc_node_range() to allocate stack
with PAGE_KERNEL protections.

- Allocated stacks are cached and later reused by new threads, so memcg
  accounting is performed manually on assigning/releasing stacks to tasks.
  Hence, __vmalloc_node_range is called without __GFP_ACCOUNT.
- vm_struct is cached to be able to find when thread free is initiated
  in interrupt context. free_thread_stack() can be called in interrupt
  context.
- On arm64, all VMAP's stacks need to have the same alignment to ensure
  that VMAP'd stack overflow detection works correctly. Arch specific
  vmap stack allocator takes care of this detail.
- This does not address interrupt stacks - according to the original patch

Thread stack allocation is initiated from clone(), fork(), vfork(),
kernel_thread() via kernel_clone(). These are a few hints for searching
the code base to understand when and how a thread stack is allocated.

Bulk of the code is in:
`kernel/fork.c <https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/kernel/fork.c>`.

stack_vm_area pointer in task_struct keeps track of the virtually allocated
stack and a non-null stack_vm_area pointer serves as an indication that the
virtually mapped kernel stacks are enabled.

::

        struct vm_struct *stack_vm_area;

Stack overflow handling
-----------------------

Leading and trailing guard pages help detect stack overflows. When the stack
overflows into the guard pages, handlers have to be careful not to overflow
the stack again. When handlers are called, it is likely that very little
stack space is left.

On x86, this is done by handling the page fault indicating the kernel
stack overflow on the double-fault stack.

Testing VMAP allocation with guard pages
----------------------------------------

How do we ensure that VMAP_STACK is actually allocating with a leading
and trailing guard page? The following lkdtm tests can help detect any
regressions.

::

        void lkdtm_STACK_GUARD_PAGE_LEADING()
        void lkdtm_STACK_GUARD_PAGE_TRAILING()

Conclusions
-----------

- A percpu cache of vmalloced stacks appears to be a bit faster than a
  high-order stack allocation, at least when the cache hits.
- THREAD_INFO_IN_TASK gets rid of arch-specific thread_info entirely and
  simply embed the thread_info (containing only flags) and 'int cpu' into
  task_struct.
- The thread stack can be freed as soon as the task is dead (without
  waiting for RCU) and then, if vmapped stacks are in use, cache the
  entire stack for reuse on the same cpu.

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

=========================================
A vmemmap diet for HugeTLB and Device DAX
=========================================

HugeTLB
=======

This section is to explain how HugeTLB Vmemmap Optimization (HVO) works.

The ``struct page`` structures are used to describe a physical page frame. By
default, there is a one-to-one mapping from a page frame to its corresponding
``struct page``.

HugeTLB pages consist of multiple base page size pages and is supported by many
architectures. See Documentation/admin-guide/mm/hugetlbpage.rst for more
details. On the x86-64 architecture, HugeTLB pages of size 2MB and 1GB are
currently supported. Since the base page size on x86 is 4KB, a 2MB HugeTLB page
consists of 512 base pages and a 1GB HugeTLB page consists of 262144 base pages.
For each base page, there is a corresponding ``struct page``.

Within the HugeTLB subsystem, only the first 4 ``struct page`` are used to
contain unique information about a HugeTLB page. ``__NR_USED_SUBPAGE`` provides
this upper limit. The only 'useful' information in the remaining ``struct page``
is the compound_head field, and this field is the same for all tail pages.

By removing redundant ``struct page`` for HugeTLB pages, memory can be returned
to the buddy allocator for other uses.

Different architectures support different HugeTLB pages. For example, the
following table is the HugeTLB page size supported by x86 and arm64
architectures. Because arm64 supports 4k, 16k, and 64k base pages and
supports contiguous entries, so it supports many kinds of sizes of HugeTLB
page.

+--------------+-----------+-----------------------------------------------+
| Architecture | Page Size |                HugeTLB Page Size              |
+--------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
|    x86-64    |    4KB    |    2MB    |    1GB    |           |           |
+--------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
|              |    4KB    |   64KB    |    2MB    |    32MB   |    1GB    |
|              +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
|    arm64     |   16KB    |    2MB    |   32MB    |     1GB   |           |
|              +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
|              |   64KB    |    2MB    |  512MB    |    16GB   |           |
+--------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

When the system boot up, every HugeTLB page has more than one ``struct page``
structs which size is (unit: pages)::

   struct_size = HugeTLB_Size / PAGE_SIZE * sizeof(struct page) / PAGE_SIZE

Where HugeTLB_Size is the size of the HugeTLB page. We know that the size
of the HugeTLB page is always n times PAGE_SIZE. So we can get the following
relationship::

   HugeTLB_Size = n * PAGE_SIZE

Then::

   struct_size = n * PAGE_SIZE / PAGE_SIZE * sizeof(struct page) / PAGE_SIZE
               = n * sizeof(struct page) / PAGE_SIZE

We can use huge mapping at the pud/pmd level for the HugeTLB page.

For the HugeTLB page of the pmd level mapping, then::

   struct_size = n * sizeof(struct page) / PAGE_SIZE
               = PAGE_SIZE / sizeof(pte_t) * sizeof(struct page) / PAGE_SIZE
               = sizeof(struct page) / sizeof(pte_t)
               = 64 / 8
               = 8 (pages)

Where n is how many pte entries which one page can contains. So the value of
n is (PAGE_SIZE / sizeof(pte_t)).

This optimization only supports 64-bit system, so the value of sizeof(pte_t)
is 8. And this optimization also applicable only when the size of ``struct page``
is a power of two. In most cases, the size of ``struct page`` is 64 bytes (e.g.
x86-64 and arm64). So if we use pmd level mapping for a HugeTLB page, the
size of ``struct page`` structs of it is 8 page frames which size depends on the
size of the base page.

For the HugeTLB page of the pud level mapping, then::

   struct_size = PAGE_SIZE / sizeof(pmd_t) * struct_size(pmd)
               = PAGE_SIZE / 8 * 8 (pages)
               = PAGE_SIZE (pages)

Where the struct_size(pmd) is the size of the ``struct page`` structs of a
HugeTLB page of the pmd level mapping.

E.g.: A 2MB HugeTLB page on x86_64 consists in 8 page frames while 1GB
HugeTLB page consists in 4096.

Next, we take the pmd level mapping of the HugeTLB page as an example to
show the internal implementation of this optimization. There are 8 pages
``struct page`` structs associated with a HugeTLB page which is pmd mapped.

Here is how things look before optimization::

    HugeTLB                  struct pages(8 pages)         page frame(8 pages)
 +-----------+ ---virt_to_page---> +-----------+   mapping to   +-----------+
 |           |                     |     0     | -------------> |     0     |
 |           |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |                     |     1     | -------------> |     1     |
 |           |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |                     |     2     | -------------> |     2     |
 |           |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |                     |     3     | -------------> |     3     |
 |           |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |                     |     4     | -------------> |     4     |
 |    PMD    |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |   level   |                     |     5     | -------------> |     5     |
 |  mapping  |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |                     |     6     | -------------> |     6     |
 |           |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |                     |     7     | -------------> |     7     |
 |           |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |
 |           |
 |           |
 +-----------+

The value of page->compound_head is the same for all tail pages. The first
page of ``struct page`` (page 0) associated with the HugeTLB page contains the 4
``struct page`` necessary to describe the HugeTLB. The only use of the remaining
pages of ``struct page`` (page 1 to page 7) is to point to page->compound_head.
Therefore, we can remap pages 1 to 7 to page 0. Only 1 page of ``struct page``
will be used for each HugeTLB page. This will allow us to free the remaining
7 pages to the buddy allocator.

Here is how things look after remapping::

    HugeTLB                  struct pages(8 pages)         page frame(8 pages)
 +-----------+ ---virt_to_page---> +-----------+   mapping to   +-----------+
 |           |                     |     0     | -------------> |     0     |
 |           |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |                     |     1     | ---------------^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
 |           |                     +-----------+                  | | | | | |
 |           |                     |     2     | -----------------+ | | | | |
 |           |                     +-----------+                    | | | | |
 |           |                     |     3     | -------------------+ | | | |
 |           |                     +-----------+                      | | | |
 |           |                     |     4     | ---------------------+ | | |
 |    PMD    |                     +-----------+                        | | |
 |   level   |                     |     5     | -----------------------+ | |
 |  mapping  |                     +-----------+                          | |
 |           |                     |     6     | -------------------------+ |
 |           |                     +-----------+                            |
 |           |                     |     7     | ---------------------------+
 |           |                     +-----------+
 |           |
 |           |
 |           |
 +-----------+

When a HugeTLB is freed to the buddy system, we should allocate 7 pages for
vmemmap pages and restore the previous mapping relationship.

For the HugeTLB page of the pud level mapping. It is similar to the former.
We also can use this approach to free (PAGE_SIZE - 1) vmemmap pages.

Apart from the HugeTLB page of the pmd/pud level mapping, some architectures
(e.g. aarch64) provides a contiguous bit in the translation table entries
that hints to the MMU to indicate that it is one of a contiguous set of
entries that can be cached in a single TLB entry.

The contiguous bit is used to increase the mapping size at the pmd and pte
(last) level. So this type of HugeTLB page can be optimized only when its
size of the ``struct page`` structs is greater than **1** page.

Notice: The head vmemmap page is not freed to the buddy allocator and all
tail vmemmap pages are mapped to the head vmemmap page frame. So we can see
more than one ``struct page`` struct with ``PG_head`` (e.g. 8 per 2 MB HugeTLB
page) associated with each HugeTLB page. The ``compound_head()`` can handle
this correctly. There is only **one** head ``struct page``, the tail
``struct page`` with ``PG_head`` are fake head ``struct page``.  We need an
approach to distinguish between those two different types of ``struct page`` so
that ``compound_head()`` can return the real head ``struct page`` when the
parameter is the tail ``struct page`` but with ``PG_head``.

Device DAX
==========

The device-dax interface uses the same tail deduplication technique explained
in the previous chapter, except when used with the vmemmap in
the device (altmap).

The following page sizes are supported in DAX: PAGE_SIZE (4K on x86_64),
PMD_SIZE (2M on x86_64) and PUD_SIZE (1G on x86_64).
For powerpc equivalent details see Documentation/arch/powerpc/vmemmap_dedup.rst

The differences with HugeTLB are relatively minor.

It only use 3 ``struct page`` for storing all information as opposed
to 4 on HugeTLB pages.

There's no remapping of vmemmap given that device-dax memory is not part of
System RAM ranges initialized at boot. Thus the tail page deduplication
happens at a later stage when we populate the sections. HugeTLB reuses the
the head vmemmap page representing, whereas device-dax reuses the tail
vmemmap page. This results in only half of the savings compared to HugeTLB.

Deduplicated tail pages are not mapped read-only.

Here's how things look like on device-dax after the sections are populated::

 +-----------+ ---virt_to_page---> +-----------+   mapping to   +-----------+
 |           |                     |     0     | -------------> |     0     |
 |           |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |                     |     1     | -------------> |     1     |
 |           |                     +-----------+                +-----------+
 |           |                     |     2     | ----------------^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
 |           |                     +-----------+                   | | | | |
 |           |                     |     3     | ------------------+ | | | |
 |           |                     +-----------+                     | | | |
 |           |                     |     4     | --------------------+ | | |
 |    PMD    |                     +-----------+                       | | |
 |   level   |                     |     5     | ----------------------+ | |
 |  mapping  |                     +-----------+                         | |
 |           |                     |     6     | ------------------------+ |
 |           |                     +-----------+                           |
 |           |                     |     7     | --------------------------+
 |           |                     +-----------+
 |           |
 |           |
 |           |
 +-----------+
======
z3fold
======

z3fold is a special purpose allocator for storing compressed pages.
It is designed to store up to three compressed pages per physical page.
It is a zbud derivative which allows for higher compression
ratio keeping the simplicity and determinism of its predecessor.

The main differences between z3fold and zbud are:

* unlike zbud, z3fold allows for up to PAGE_SIZE allocations
* z3fold can hold up to 3 compressed pages in its page
* z3fold doesn't export any API itself and is thus intended to be used
  via the zpool API.

To keep the determinism and simplicity, z3fold, just like zbud, always
stores an integral number of compressed pages per page, but it can store
up to 3 pages unlike zbud which can store at most 2. Therefore the
compression ratio goes to around 2.7x while zbud's one is around 1.7x.

Unlike zbud (but like zsmalloc for that matter) z3fold_alloc() does not
return a dereferenceable pointer. Instead, it returns an unsigned long
handle which encodes actual location of the allocated object.

Keeping effective compression ratio close to zsmalloc's, z3fold doesn't
depend on MMU enabled and provides more predictable reclaim behavior
which makes it a better fit for small and response-critical systems.
========
zsmalloc
========

This allocator is designed for use with zram. Thus, the allocator is
supposed to work well under low memory conditions. In particular, it
never attempts higher order page allocation which is very likely to
fail under memory pressure. On the other hand, if we just use single
(0-order) pages, it would suffer from very high fragmentation --
any object of size PAGE_SIZE/2 or larger would occupy an entire page.
This was one of the major issues with its predecessor (xvmalloc).

To overcome these issues, zsmalloc allocates a bunch of 0-order pages
and links them together using various 'struct page' fields. These linked
pages act as a single higher-order page i.e. an object can span 0-order
page boundaries. The code refers to these linked pages as a single entity
called zspage.

For simplicity, zsmalloc can only allocate objects of size up to PAGE_SIZE
since this satisfies the requirements of all its current users (in the
worst case, page is incompressible and is thus stored "as-is" i.e. in
uncompressed form). For allocation requests larger than this size, failure
is returned (see zs_malloc).

Additionally, zs_malloc() does not return a dereferenceable pointer.
Instead, it returns an opaque handle (unsigned long) which encodes actual
location of the allocated object. The reason for this indirection is that
zsmalloc does not keep zspages permanently mapped since that would cause
issues on 32-bit systems where the VA region for kernel space mappings
is very small. So, before using the allocating memory, the object has to
be mapped using zs_map_object() to get a usable pointer and subsequently
unmapped using zs_unmap_object().

stat
====

With CONFIG_ZSMALLOC_STAT, we could see zsmalloc internal information via
``/sys/kernel/debug/zsmalloc/<user name>``. Here is a sample of stat output::

 # cat /sys/kernel/debug/zsmalloc/zram0/classes

 class  size       10%       20%       30%       40%       50%       60%       70%       80%       90%       99%      100% obj_allocated   obj_used pages_used pages_per_zspage freeable
    ...
    ...
    30   512         0        12         4         1         0         1         0         0         1         0       414          3464       3346        433                1       14
    31   528         2         7         2         2         1         0         1         0         0         2       117          4154       3793        536                4       44
    32   544         6         3         4         1         2         1         0         0         0         1       260          4170       3965        556                2       26
    ...
    ...


class
	index
size
	object size zspage stores
10%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio less than 10% (see below)
20%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio between 10% and 20%
30%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio between 20% and 30%
40%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio between 30% and 40%
50%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio between 40% and 50%
60%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio between 50% and 60%
70%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio between 60% and 70%
80%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio between 70% and 80%
90%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio between 80% and 90%
99%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio between 90% and 99%
100%
	the number of zspages with usage ratio 100%
obj_allocated
	the number of objects allocated
obj_used
	the number of objects allocated to the user
pages_used
	the number of pages allocated for the class
pages_per_zspage
	the number of 0-order pages to make a zspage
freeable
	the approximate number of pages class compaction can free

Each zspage maintains inuse counter which keeps track of the number of
objects stored in the zspage.  The inuse counter determines the zspage's
"fullness group" which is calculated as the ratio of the "inuse" objects to
the total number of objects the zspage can hold (objs_per_zspage). The
closer the inuse counter is to objs_per_zspage, the better.

Internals
=========

zsmalloc has 255 size classes, each of which can hold a number of zspages.
Each zspage can contain up to ZSMALLOC_CHAIN_SIZE physical (0-order) pages.
The optimal zspage chain size for each size class is calculated during the
creation of the zsmalloc pool (see calculate_zspage_chain_size()).

As an optimization, zsmalloc merges size classes that have similar
characteristics in terms of the number of pages per zspage and the number
of objects that each zspage can store.

For instance, consider the following size classes:::

  class  size       10%   ....    100% obj_allocated   obj_used pages_used pages_per_zspage freeable
  ...
     94  1536        0    ....       0             0          0          0                3        0
    100  1632        0    ....       0             0          0          0                2        0
  ...


Size classes #95-99 are merged with size class #100. This means that when we
need to store an object of size, say, 1568 bytes, we end up using size class
#100 instead of size class #96. Size class #100 is meant for objects of size
1632 bytes, so each object of size 1568 bytes wastes 1632-1568=64 bytes.

Size class #100 consists of zspages with 2 physical pages each, which can
hold a total of 5 objects. If we need to store 13 objects of size 1568, we
end up allocating three zspages, or 6 physical pages.

However, if we take a closer look at size class #96 (which is meant for
objects of size 1568 bytes) and trace `calculate_zspage_chain_size()`, we
find that the most optimal zspage configuration for this class is a chain
of 5 physical pages:::

    pages per zspage      wasted bytes     used%
           1                  960           76
           2                  352           95
           3                 1312           89
           4                  704           95
           5                   96           99

This means that a class #96 configuration with 5 physical pages can store 13
objects of size 1568 in a single zspage, using a total of 5 physical pages.
This is more efficient than the class #100 configuration, which would use 6
physical pages to store the same number of objects.

As the zspage chain size for class #96 increases, its key characteristics
such as pages per-zspage and objects per-zspage also change. This leads to
dewer class mergers, resulting in a more compact grouping of classes, which
reduces memory wastage.

Let's take a closer look at the bottom of `/sys/kernel/debug/zsmalloc/zramX/classes`:::

  class  size       10%   ....    100% obj_allocated   obj_used pages_used pages_per_zspage freeable

  ...
    202  3264         0   ..         0             0          0          0                4        0
    254  4096         0   ..         0             0          0          0                1        0
  ...

Size class #202 stores objects of size 3264 bytes and has a maximum of 4 pages
per zspage. Any object larger than 3264 bytes is considered huge and belongs
to size class #254, which stores each object in its own physical page (objects
in huge classes do not share pages).

Increasing the size of the chain of zspages also results in a higher watermark
for the huge size class and fewer huge classes overall. This allows for more
efficient storage of large objects.

For zspage chain size of 8, huge class watermark becomes 3632 bytes:::

  class  size       10%   ....    100% obj_allocated   obj_used pages_used pages_per_zspage freeable

  ...
    202  3264         0   ..         0             0          0          0                4        0
    211  3408         0   ..         0             0          0          0                5        0
    217  3504         0   ..         0             0          0          0                6        0
    222  3584         0   ..         0             0          0          0                7        0
    225  3632         0   ..         0             0          0          0                8        0
    254  4096         0   ..         0             0          0          0                1        0
  ...

For zspage chain size of 16, huge class watermark becomes 3840 bytes:::

  class  size       10%   ....    100% obj_allocated   obj_used pages_used pages_per_zspage freeable

  ...
    202  3264         0   ..         0             0          0          0                4        0
    206  3328         0   ..         0             0          0          0               13        0
    207  3344         0   ..         0             0          0          0                9        0
    208  3360         0   ..         0             0          0          0               14        0
    211  3408         0   ..         0             0          0          0                5        0
    212  3424         0   ..         0             0          0          0               16        0
    214  3456         0   ..         0             0          0          0               11        0
    217  3504         0   ..         0             0          0          0                6        0
    219  3536         0   ..         0             0          0          0               13        0
    222  3584         0   ..         0             0          0          0                7        0
    223  3600         0   ..         0             0          0          0               15        0
    225  3632         0   ..         0             0          0          0                8        0
    228  3680         0   ..         0             0          0          0                9        0
    230  3712         0   ..         0             0          0          0               10        0
    232  3744         0   ..         0             0          0          0               11        0
    234  3776         0   ..         0             0          0          0               12        0
    235  3792         0   ..         0             0          0          0               13        0
    236  3808         0   ..         0             0          0          0               14        0
    238  3840         0   ..         0             0          0          0               15        0
    254  4096         0   ..         0             0          0          0                1        0
  ...

Overall the combined zspage chain size effect on zsmalloc pool configuration:::

  pages per zspage   number of size classes (clusters)   huge size class watermark
         4                        69                               3264
         5                        86                               3408
         6                        93                               3504
         7                       112                               3584
         8                       123                               3632
         9                       140                               3680
        10                       143                               3712
        11                       159                               3744
        12                       164                               3776
        13                       180                               3792
        14                       183                               3808
        15                       188                               3840
        16                       191                               3840


A synthetic test
----------------

zram as a build artifacts storage (Linux kernel compilation).

* `CONFIG_ZSMALLOC_CHAIN_SIZE=4`

  zsmalloc classes stats:::

    class  size       10%   ....    100% obj_allocated   obj_used pages_used pages_per_zspage freeable

    ...
    Total              13   ..        51        413836     412973     159955                         3

  zram mm_stat:::

   1691783168 628083717 655175680        0 655175680       60        0    34048    34049


* `CONFIG_ZSMALLOC_CHAIN_SIZE=8`

  zsmalloc classes stats:::

    class  size       10%   ....    100% obj_allocated   obj_used pages_used pages_per_zspage freeable

    ...
    Total              18   ..        87        414852     412978     156666                         0

  zram mm_stat:::

    1691803648 627793930 641703936        0 641703936       60        0    33591    33591

Using larger zspage chains may result in using fewer physical pages, as seen
in the example where the number of physical pages used decreased from 159955
to 156666, at the same time maximum zsmalloc pool memory usage went down from
655175680 to 641703936 bytes.

However, this advantage may be offset by the potential for increased system
memory pressure (as some zspages have larger chain sizes) in cases where there
is heavy internal fragmentation and zspool compaction is unable to relocate
objects and release zspages. In these cases, it is recommended to decrease
the limit on the size of the zspage chains (as specified by the
CONFIG_ZSMALLOC_CHAIN_SIZE option).

Functions
=========

.. kernel-doc:: mm/zsmalloc.c
================================================
Completions - "wait for completion" barrier APIs
================================================

Introduction:
-------------

If you have one or more threads that must wait for some kernel activity
to have reached a point or a specific state, completions can provide a
race-free solution to this problem. Semantically they are somewhat like a
pthread_barrier() and have similar use-cases.

Completions are a code synchronization mechanism which is preferable to any
misuse of locks/semaphores and busy-loops. Any time you think of using
yield() or some quirky msleep(1) loop to allow something else to proceed,
you probably want to look into using one of the wait_for_completion*()
calls and complete() instead.

The advantage of using completions is that they have a well defined, focused
purpose which makes it very easy to see the intent of the code, but they
also result in more efficient code as all threads can continue execution
until the result is actually needed, and both the waiting and the signalling
is highly efficient using low level scheduler sleep/wakeup facilities.

Completions are built on top of the waitqueue and wakeup infrastructure of
the Linux scheduler. The event the threads on the waitqueue are waiting for
is reduced to a simple flag in 'struct completion', appropriately called "done".

As completions are scheduling related, the code can be found in
kernel/sched/completion.c.


Usage:
------

There are three main parts to using completions:

 - the initialization of the 'struct completion' synchronization object
 - the waiting part through a call to one of the variants of wait_for_completion(),
 - the signaling side through a call to complete() or complete_all().

There are also some helper functions for checking the state of completions.
Note that while initialization must happen first, the waiting and signaling
part can happen in any order. I.e. it's entirely normal for a thread
to have marked a completion as 'done' before another thread checks whether
it has to wait for it.

To use completions you need to #include <linux/completion.h> and
create a static or dynamic variable of type 'struct completion',
which has only two fields::

	struct completion {
		unsigned int done;
		struct swait_queue_head wait;
	};

This provides the ->wait waitqueue to place tasks on for waiting (if any), and
the ->done completion flag for indicating whether it's completed or not.

Completions should be named to refer to the event that is being synchronized on.
A good example is::

	wait_for_completion(&early_console_added);

	complete(&early_console_added);

Good, intuitive naming (as always) helps code readability. Naming a completion
'complete' is not helpful unless the purpose is super obvious...


Initializing completions:
-------------------------

Dynamically allocated completion objects should preferably be embedded in data
structures that are assured to be alive for the life-time of the function/driver,
to prevent races with asynchronous complete() calls from occurring.

Particular care should be taken when using the _timeout() or _killable()/_interruptible()
variants of wait_for_completion(), as it must be assured that memory de-allocation
does not happen until all related activities (complete() or reinit_completion())
have taken place, even if these wait functions return prematurely due to a timeout
or a signal triggering.

Initializing of dynamically allocated completion objects is done via a call to
init_completion()::

	init_completion(&dynamic_object->done);

In this call we initialize the waitqueue and set ->done to 0, i.e. "not completed"
or "not done".

The re-initialization function, reinit_completion(), simply resets the
->done field to 0 ("not done"), without touching the waitqueue.
Callers of this function must make sure that there are no racy
wait_for_completion() calls going on in parallel.

Calling init_completion() on the same completion object twice is
most likely a bug as it re-initializes the queue to an empty queue and
enqueued tasks could get "lost" - use reinit_completion() in that case,
but be aware of other races.

For static declaration and initialization, macros are available.

For static (or global) declarations in file scope you can use
DECLARE_COMPLETION()::

	static DECLARE_COMPLETION(setup_done);
	DECLARE_COMPLETION(setup_done);

Note that in this case the completion is boot time (or module load time)
initialized to 'not done' and doesn't require an init_completion() call.

When a completion is declared as a local variable within a function,
then the initialization should always use DECLARE_COMPLETION_ONSTACK()
explicitly, not just to make lockdep happy, but also to make it clear
that limited scope had been considered and is intentional::

	DECLARE_COMPLETION_ONSTACK(setup_done)

Note that when using completion objects as local variables you must be
acutely aware of the short life time of the function stack: the function
must not return to a calling context until all activities (such as waiting
threads) have ceased and the completion object is completely unused.

To emphasise this again: in particular when using some of the waiting API variants
with more complex outcomes, such as the timeout or signalling (_timeout(),
_killable() and _interruptible()) variants, the wait might complete
prematurely while the object might still be in use by another thread - and a return
from the wait_on_completion*() caller function will deallocate the function
stack and cause subtle data corruption if a complete() is done in some
other thread. Simple testing might not trigger these kinds of races.

If unsure, use dynamically allocated completion objects, preferably embedded
in some other long lived object that has a boringly long life time which
exceeds the life time of any helper threads using the completion object,
or has a lock or other synchronization mechanism to make sure complete()
is not called on a freed object.

A naive DECLARE_COMPLETION() on the stack triggers a lockdep warning.

Waiting for completions:
------------------------

For a thread to wait for some concurrent activity to finish, it
calls wait_for_completion() on the initialized completion structure::

	void wait_for_completion(struct completion *done)

A typical usage scenario is::

	CPU#1					CPU#2

	struct completion setup_done;

	init_completion(&setup_done);
	initialize_work(...,&setup_done,...);

	/* run non-dependent code */		/* do setup */

	wait_for_completion(&setup_done);	complete(&setup_done);

This is not implying any particular order between wait_for_completion() and
the call to complete() - if the call to complete() happened before the call
to wait_for_completion() then the waiting side simply will continue
immediately as all dependencies are satisfied; if not, it will block until
completion is signaled by complete().

Note that wait_for_completion() is calling spin_lock_irq()/spin_unlock_irq(),
so it can only be called safely when you know that interrupts are enabled.
Calling it from IRQs-off atomic contexts will result in hard-to-detect
spurious enabling of interrupts.

The default behavior is to wait without a timeout and to mark the task as
uninterruptible. wait_for_completion() and its variants are only safe
in process context (as they can sleep) but not in atomic context,
interrupt context, with disabled IRQs, or preemption is disabled - see also
try_wait_for_completion() below for handling completion in atomic/interrupt
context.

As all variants of wait_for_completion() can (obviously) block for a long
time depending on the nature of the activity they are waiting for, so in
most cases you probably don't want to call this with held mutexes.


wait_for_completion*() variants available:
------------------------------------------

The below variants all return status and this status should be checked in
most(/all) cases - in cases where the status is deliberately not checked you
probably want to make a note explaining this (e.g. see
arch/arm/kernel/smp.c:__cpu_up()).

A common problem that occurs is to have unclean assignment of return types,
so take care to assign return-values to variables of the proper type.

Checking for the specific meaning of return values also has been found
to be quite inaccurate, e.g. constructs like::

	if (!wait_for_completion_interruptible_timeout(...))

... would execute the same code path for successful completion and for the
interrupted case - which is probably not what you want::

	int wait_for_completion_interruptible(struct completion *done)

This function marks the task TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE while it is waiting.
If a signal was received while waiting it will return -ERESTARTSYS; 0 otherwise::

	unsigned long wait_for_completion_timeout(struct completion *done, unsigned long timeout)

The task is marked as TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE and will wait at most 'timeout'
jiffies. If a timeout occurs it returns 0, else the remaining time in
jiffies (but at least 1).

Timeouts are preferably calculated with msecs_to_jiffies() or usecs_to_jiffies(),
to make the code largely HZ-invariant.

If the returned timeout value is deliberately ignored a comment should probably explain
why (e.g. see drivers/mfd/wm8350-core.c wm8350_read_auxadc())::

	long wait_for_completion_interruptible_timeout(struct completion *done, unsigned long timeout)

This function passes a timeout in jiffies and marks the task as
TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE. If a signal was received it will return -ERESTARTSYS;
otherwise it returns 0 if the completion timed out, or the remaining time in
jiffies if completion occurred.

Further variants include _killable which uses TASK_KILLABLE as the
designated tasks state and will return -ERESTARTSYS if it is interrupted,
or 0 if completion was achieved.  There is a _timeout variant as well::

	long wait_for_completion_killable(struct completion *done)
	long wait_for_completion_killable_timeout(struct completion *done, unsigned long timeout)

The _io variants wait_for_completion_io() behave the same as the non-_io
variants, except for accounting waiting time as 'waiting on IO', which has
an impact on how the task is accounted in scheduling/IO stats::

	void wait_for_completion_io(struct completion *done)
	unsigned long wait_for_completion_io_timeout(struct completion *done, unsigned long timeout)


Signaling completions:
----------------------

A thread that wants to signal that the conditions for continuation have been
achieved calls complete() to signal exactly one of the waiters that it can
continue::

	void complete(struct completion *done)

... or calls complete_all() to signal all current and future waiters::

	void complete_all(struct completion *done)

The signaling will work as expected even if completions are signaled before
a thread starts waiting. This is achieved by the waiter "consuming"
(decrementing) the done field of 'struct completion'. Waiting threads
wakeup order is the same in which they were enqueued (FIFO order).

If complete() is called multiple times then this will allow for that number
of waiters to continue - each call to complete() will simply increment the
done field. Calling complete_all() multiple times is a bug though. Both
complete() and complete_all() can be called in IRQ/atomic context safely.

There can only be one thread calling complete() or complete_all() on a
particular 'struct completion' at any time - serialized through the wait
queue spinlock. Any such concurrent calls to complete() or complete_all()
probably are a design bug.

Signaling completion from IRQ context is fine as it will appropriately
lock with spin_lock_irqsave()/spin_unlock_irqrestore() and it will never
sleep.


try_wait_for_completion()/completion_done():
--------------------------------------------

The try_wait_for_completion() function will not put the thread on the wait
queue but rather returns false if it would need to enqueue (block) the thread,
else it consumes one posted completion and returns true::

	bool try_wait_for_completion(struct completion *done)

Finally, to check the state of a completion without changing it in any way,
call completion_done(), which returns false if there are no posted
completions that were not yet consumed by waiters (implying that there are
waiters) and true otherwise::

	bool completion_done(struct completion *done)

Both try_wait_for_completion() and completion_done() are safe to be called in
IRQ or atomic context.
=========
Scheduler
=========

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1


    completion
    membarrier
    sched-arch
    sched-bwc
    sched-deadline
    sched-design-CFS
    sched-eevdf
    sched-domains
    sched-capacity
    sched-energy
    schedutil
    sched-util-clamp
    sched-nice-design
    sched-rt-group
    sched-stats
    sched-ext
    sched-debug

    text_files

.. only::  subproject and html

   Indices
   =======

   * :ref:`genindex`
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

========================
membarrier() System Call
========================

MEMBARRIER_CMD_{PRIVATE,GLOBAL}_EXPEDITED - Architecture requirements
=====================================================================

Memory barriers before updating rq->curr
----------------------------------------

The commands MEMBARRIER_CMD_PRIVATE_EXPEDITED and MEMBARRIER_CMD_GLOBAL_EXPEDITED
require each architecture to have a full memory barrier after coming from
user-space, before updating rq->curr.  This barrier is implied by the sequence
rq_lock(); smp_mb__after_spinlock() in __schedule().  The barrier matches a full
barrier in the proximity of the membarrier system call exit, cf.
membarrier_{private,global}_expedited().

Memory barriers after updating rq->curr
---------------------------------------

The commands MEMBARRIER_CMD_PRIVATE_EXPEDITED and MEMBARRIER_CMD_GLOBAL_EXPEDITED
require each architecture to have a full memory barrier after updating rq->curr,
before returning to user-space.  The schemes providing this barrier on the various
architectures are as follows.

 - alpha, arc, arm, hexagon, mips rely on the full barrier implied by
   spin_unlock() in finish_lock_switch().

 - arm64 relies on the full barrier implied by switch_to().

 - powerpc, riscv, s390, sparc, x86 rely on the full barrier implied by
   switch_mm(), if mm is not NULL; they rely on the full barrier implied
   by mmdrop(), otherwise.  On powerpc and riscv, switch_mm() relies on
   membarrier_arch_switch_mm().

The barrier matches a full barrier in the proximity of the membarrier system call
entry, cf. membarrier_{private,global}_expedited().
=================================================================
CPU Scheduler implementation hints for architecture specific code
=================================================================

	Nick Piggin, 2005

Context switch
==============
1. Runqueue locking
By default, the switch_to arch function is called with the runqueue
locked. This is usually not a problem unless switch_to may need to
take the runqueue lock. This is usually due to a wake up operation in
the context switch.

To request the scheduler call switch_to with the runqueue unlocked,
you must `#define __ARCH_WANT_UNLOCKED_CTXSW` in a header file
(typically the one where switch_to is defined).

Unlocked context switches introduce only a very minor performance
penalty to the core scheduler implementation in the CONFIG_SMP case.

CPU idle
========
Your cpu_idle routines need to obey the following rules:

1. Preempt should now disabled over idle routines. Should only
   be enabled to call schedule() then disabled again.

2. need_resched/TIF_NEED_RESCHED is only ever set, and will never
   be cleared until the running task has called schedule(). Idle
   threads need only ever query need_resched, and may never set or
   clear it.

3. When cpu_idle finds (need_resched() == 'true'), it should call
   schedule(). It should not call schedule() otherwise.

4. The only time interrupts need to be disabled when checking
   need_resched is if we are about to sleep the processor until
   the next interrupt (this doesn't provide any protection of
   need_resched, it prevents losing an interrupt):

	4a. Common problem with this type of sleep appears to be::

	        local_irq_disable();
	        if (!need_resched()) {
	                local_irq_enable();
	                *** resched interrupt arrives here ***
	                __asm__("sleep until next interrupt");
	        }

5. TIF_POLLING_NRFLAG can be set by idle routines that do not
   need an interrupt to wake them up when need_resched goes high.
   In other words, they must be periodically polling need_resched,
   although it may be reasonable to do some background work or enter
   a low CPU priority.

      - 5a. If TIF_POLLING_NRFLAG is set, and we do decide to enter
	an interrupt sleep, it needs to be cleared then a memory
	barrier issued (followed by a test of need_resched with
	interrupts disabled, as explained in 3).

arch/x86/kernel/process.c has examples of both polling and
sleeping idle functions.


Possible arch/ problems
=======================

Possible arch problems I found (and either tried to fix or didn't):

sparc - IRQs on at this point(?), change local_irq_save to _disable.
      - TODO: needs secondary CPUs to disable preempt (See #1)
=====================
CFS Bandwidth Control
=====================

.. note::
   This document only discusses CPU bandwidth control for SCHED_NORMAL.
   The SCHED_RT case is covered in Documentation/scheduler/sched-rt-group.rst

CFS bandwidth control is a CONFIG_FAIR_GROUP_SCHED extension which allows the
specification of the maximum CPU bandwidth available to a group or hierarchy.

The bandwidth allowed for a group is specified using a quota and period. Within
each given "period" (microseconds), a task group is allocated up to "quota"
microseconds of CPU time. That quota is assigned to per-cpu run queues in
slices as threads in the cgroup become runnable. Once all quota has been
assigned any additional requests for quota will result in those threads being
throttled. Throttled threads will not be able to run again until the next
period when the quota is replenished.

A group's unassigned quota is globally tracked, being refreshed back to
cfs_quota units at each period boundary. As threads consume this bandwidth it
is transferred to cpu-local "silos" on a demand basis. The amount transferred
within each of these updates is tunable and described as the "slice".

Burst feature
-------------
This feature borrows time now against our future underrun, at the cost of
increased interference against the other system users. All nicely bounded.

Traditional (UP-EDF) bandwidth control is something like:

  (U = \Sum u_i) <= 1

This guaranteeds both that every deadline is met and that the system is
stable. After all, if U were > 1, then for every second of walltime,
we'd have to run more than a second of program time, and obviously miss
our deadline, but the next deadline will be further out still, there is
never time to catch up, unbounded fail.

The burst feature observes that a workload doesn't always executes the full
quota; this enables one to describe u_i as a statistical distribution.

For example, have u_i = {x,e}_i, where x is the p(95) and x+e p(100)
(the traditional WCET). This effectively allows u to be smaller,
increasing the efficiency (we can pack more tasks in the system), but at
the cost of missing deadlines when all the odds line up. However, it
does maintain stability, since every overrun must be paired with an
underrun as long as our x is above the average.

That is, suppose we have 2 tasks, both specify a p(95) value, then we
have a p(95)*p(95) = 90.25% chance both tasks are within their quota and
everything is good. At the same time we have a p(5)p(5) = 0.25% chance
both tasks will exceed their quota at the same time (guaranteed deadline
fail). Somewhere in between there's a threshold where one exceeds and
the other doesn't underrun enough to compensate; this depends on the
specific CDFs.

At the same time, we can say that the worst case deadline miss, will be
\Sum e_i; that is, there is a bounded tardiness (under the assumption
that x+e is indeed WCET).

The interferenece when using burst is valued by the possibilities for
missing the deadline and the average WCET. Test results showed that when
there many cgroups or CPU is under utilized, the interference is
limited. More details are shown in:
https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/5371BD36-55AE-4F71-B9D7-B86DC32E3D2B@linux.alibaba.com/

Management
----------
Quota, period and burst are managed within the cpu subsystem via cgroupfs.

.. note::
   The cgroupfs files described in this section are only applicable
   to cgroup v1. For cgroup v2, see
   :ref:`Documentation/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.rst <cgroup-v2-cpu>`.

- cpu.cfs_quota_us: run-time replenished within a period (in microseconds)
- cpu.cfs_period_us: the length of a period (in microseconds)
- cpu.stat: exports throttling statistics [explained further below]
- cpu.cfs_burst_us: the maximum accumulated run-time (in microseconds)

The default values are::

	cpu.cfs_period_us=100ms
	cpu.cfs_quota_us=-1
	cpu.cfs_burst_us=0

A value of -1 for cpu.cfs_quota_us indicates that the group does not have any
bandwidth restriction in place, such a group is described as an unconstrained
bandwidth group. This represents the traditional work-conserving behavior for
CFS.

Writing any (valid) positive value(s) no smaller than cpu.cfs_burst_us will
enact the specified bandwidth limit. The minimum quota allowed for the quota or
period is 1ms. There is also an upper bound on the period length of 1s.
Additional restrictions exist when bandwidth limits are used in a hierarchical
fashion, these are explained in more detail below.

Writing any negative value to cpu.cfs_quota_us will remove the bandwidth limit
and return the group to an unconstrained state once more.

A value of 0 for cpu.cfs_burst_us indicates that the group can not accumulate
any unused bandwidth. It makes the traditional bandwidth control behavior for
CFS unchanged. Writing any (valid) positive value(s) no larger than
cpu.cfs_quota_us into cpu.cfs_burst_us will enact the cap on unused bandwidth
accumulation.

Any updates to a group's bandwidth specification will result in it becoming
unthrottled if it is in a constrained state.

System wide settings
--------------------
For efficiency run-time is transferred between the global pool and CPU local
"silos" in a batch fashion. This greatly reduces global accounting pressure
on large systems. The amount transferred each time such an update is required
is described as the "slice".

This is tunable via procfs::

	/proc/sys/kernel/sched_cfs_bandwidth_slice_us (default=5ms)

Larger slice values will reduce transfer overheads, while smaller values allow
for more fine-grained consumption.

Statistics
----------
A group's bandwidth statistics are exported via 5 fields in cpu.stat.

cpu.stat:

- nr_periods: Number of enforcement intervals that have elapsed.
- nr_throttled: Number of times the group has been throttled/limited.
- throttled_time: The total time duration (in nanoseconds) for which entities
  of the group have been throttled.
- nr_bursts: Number of periods burst occurs.
- burst_time: Cumulative wall-time (in nanoseconds) that any CPUs has used
  above quota in respective periods.

This interface is read-only.

Hierarchical considerations
---------------------------
The interface enforces that an individual entity's bandwidth is always
attainable, that is: max(c_i) <= C. However, over-subscription in the
aggregate case is explicitly allowed to enable work-conserving semantics
within a hierarchy:

  e.g. \Sum (c_i) may exceed C

[ Where C is the parent's bandwidth, and c_i its children ]


There are two ways in which a group may become throttled:

	a. it fully consumes its own quota within a period
	b. a parent's quota is fully consumed within its period

In case b) above, even though the child may have runtime remaining it will not
be allowed to until the parent's runtime is refreshed.

CFS Bandwidth Quota Caveats
---------------------------
Once a slice is assigned to a cpu it does not expire.  However all but 1ms of
the slice may be returned to the global pool if all threads on that cpu become
unrunnable. This is configured at compile time by the min_cfs_rq_runtime
variable. This is a performance tweak that helps prevent added contention on
the global lock.

The fact that cpu-local slices do not expire results in some interesting corner
cases that should be understood.

For cgroup cpu constrained applications that are cpu limited this is a
relatively moot point because they will naturally consume the entirety of their
quota as well as the entirety of each cpu-local slice in each period. As a
result it is expected that nr_periods roughly equal nr_throttled, and that
cpuacct.usage will increase roughly equal to cfs_quota_us in each period.

For highly-threaded, non-cpu bound applications this non-expiration nuance
allows applications to briefly burst past their quota limits by the amount of
unused slice on each cpu that the task group is running on (typically at most
1ms per cpu or as defined by min_cfs_rq_runtime).  This slight burst only
applies if quota had been assigned to a cpu and then not fully used or returned
in previous periods. This burst amount will not be transferred between cores.
As a result, this mechanism still strictly limits the task group to quota
average usage, albeit over a longer time window than a single period.  This
also limits the burst ability to no more than 1ms per cpu.  This provides
better more predictable user experience for highly threaded applications with
small quota limits on high core count machines. It also eliminates the
propensity to throttle these applications while simultaneously using less than
quota amounts of cpu. Another way to say this, is that by allowing the unused
portion of a slice to remain valid across periods we have decreased the
possibility of wastefully expiring quota on cpu-local silos that don't need a
full slice's amount of cpu time.

The interaction between cpu-bound and non-cpu-bound-interactive applications
should also be considered, especially when single core usage hits 100%. If you
gave each of these applications half of a cpu-core and they both got scheduled
on the same CPU it is theoretically possible that the non-cpu bound application
will use up to 1ms additional quota in some periods, thereby preventing the
cpu-bound application from fully using its quota by that same amount. In these
instances it will be up to the CFS algorithm (see sched-design-CFS.rst) to
decide which application is chosen to run, as they will both be runnable and
have remaining quota. This runtime discrepancy will be made up in the following
periods when the interactive application idles.

Examples
--------
1. Limit a group to 1 CPU worth of runtime::

	If period is 250ms and quota is also 250ms, the group will get
	1 CPU worth of runtime every 250ms.

	# echo 250000 > cpu.cfs_quota_us /* quota = 250ms */
	# echo 250000 > cpu.cfs_period_us /* period = 250ms */

2. Limit a group to 2 CPUs worth of runtime on a multi-CPU machine

   With 500ms period and 1000ms quota, the group can get 2 CPUs worth of
   runtime every 500ms::

	# echo 1000000 > cpu.cfs_quota_us /* quota = 1000ms */
	# echo 500000 > cpu.cfs_period_us /* period = 500ms */

	The larger period here allows for increased burst capacity.

3. Limit a group to 20% of 1 CPU.

   With 50ms period, 10ms quota will be equivalent to 20% of 1 CPU::

	# echo 10000 > cpu.cfs_quota_us /* quota = 10ms */
	# echo 50000 > cpu.cfs_period_us /* period = 50ms */

   By using a small period here we are ensuring a consistent latency
   response at the expense of burst capacity.

4. Limit a group to 40% of 1 CPU, and allow accumulate up to 20% of 1 CPU
   additionally, in case accumulation has been done.

   With 50ms period, 20ms quota will be equivalent to 40% of 1 CPU.
   And 10ms burst will be equivalent to 20% of 1 CPU::

	# echo 20000 > cpu.cfs_quota_us /* quota = 20ms */
	# echo 50000 > cpu.cfs_period_us /* period = 50ms */
	# echo 10000 > cpu.cfs_burst_us /* burst = 10ms */

   Larger buffer setting (no larger than quota) allows greater burst capacity.
=========================
Capacity Aware Scheduling
=========================

1. CPU Capacity
===============

1.1 Introduction
----------------

Conventional, homogeneous SMP platforms are composed of purely identical
CPUs. Heterogeneous platforms on the other hand are composed of CPUs with
different performance characteristics - on such platforms, not all CPUs can be
considered equal.

CPU capacity is a measure of the performance a CPU can reach, normalized against
the most performant CPU in the system. Heterogeneous systems are also called
asymmetric CPU capacity systems, as they contain CPUs of different capacities.

Disparity in maximum attainable performance (IOW in maximum CPU capacity) stems
from two factors:

- not all CPUs may have the same microarchitecture (µarch).
- with Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling (DVFS), not all CPUs may be
  physically able to attain the higher Operating Performance Points (OPP).

Arm big.LITTLE systems are an example of both. The big CPUs are more
performance-oriented than the LITTLE ones (more pipeline stages, bigger caches,
smarter predictors, etc), and can usually reach higher OPPs than the LITTLE ones
can.

CPU performance is usually expressed in Millions of Instructions Per Second
(MIPS), which can also be expressed as a given amount of instructions attainable
per Hz, leading to::

  capacity(cpu) = work_per_hz(cpu) * max_freq(cpu)

1.2 Scheduler terms
-------------------

Two different capacity values are used within the scheduler. A CPU's
``original capacity`` is its maximum attainable capacity, i.e. its maximum
attainable performance level. This original capacity is returned by
the function arch_scale_cpu_capacity(). A CPU's ``capacity`` is its ``original
capacity`` to which some loss of available performance (e.g. time spent
handling IRQs) is subtracted.

Note that a CPU's ``capacity`` is solely intended to be used by the CFS class,
while ``original capacity`` is class-agnostic. The rest of this document will use
the term ``capacity`` interchangeably with ``original capacity`` for the sake of
brevity.

1.3 Platform examples
---------------------

1.3.1 Identical OPPs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Consider an hypothetical dual-core asymmetric CPU capacity system where

- work_per_hz(CPU0) = W
- work_per_hz(CPU1) = W/2
- all CPUs are running at the same fixed frequency

By the above definition of capacity:

- capacity(CPU0) = C
- capacity(CPU1) = C/2

To draw the parallel with Arm big.LITTLE, CPU0 would be a big while CPU1 would
be a LITTLE.

With a workload that periodically does a fixed amount of work, you will get an
execution trace like so::

 CPU0 work ^
           |     ____                ____                ____
           |    |    |              |    |              |    |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+-> time

 CPU1 work ^
           |     _________           _________           ____
           |    |         |         |         |         |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+-> time

CPU0 has the highest capacity in the system (C), and completes a fixed amount of
work W in T units of time. On the other hand, CPU1 has half the capacity of
CPU0, and thus only completes W/2 in T.

1.3.2 Different max OPPs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Usually, CPUs of different capacity values also have different maximum
OPPs. Consider the same CPUs as above (i.e. same work_per_hz()) with:

- max_freq(CPU0) = F
- max_freq(CPU1) = 2/3 * F

This yields:

- capacity(CPU0) = C
- capacity(CPU1) = C/3

Executing the same workload as described in 1.3.1, which each CPU running at its
maximum frequency results in::

 CPU0 work ^
           |     ____                ____                ____
           |    |    |              |    |              |    |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+-> time

                            workload on CPU1
 CPU1 work ^
           |     ______________      ______________      ____
           |    |              |    |              |    |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+-> time

1.4 Representation caveat
-------------------------

It should be noted that having a *single* value to represent differences in CPU
performance is somewhat of a contentious point. The relative performance
difference between two different µarchs could be X% on integer operations, Y% on
floating point operations, Z% on branches, and so on. Still, results using this
simple approach have been satisfactory for now.

2. Task utilization
===================

2.1 Introduction
----------------

Capacity aware scheduling requires an expression of a task's requirements with
regards to CPU capacity. Each scheduler class can express this differently, and
while task utilization is specific to CFS, it is convenient to describe it here
in order to introduce more generic concepts.

Task utilization is a percentage meant to represent the throughput requirements
of a task. A simple approximation of it is the task's duty cycle, i.e.::

  task_util(p) = duty_cycle(p)

On an SMP system with fixed frequencies, 100% utilization suggests the task is a
busy loop. Conversely, 10% utilization hints it is a small periodic task that
spends more time sleeping than executing. Variable CPU frequencies and
asymmetric CPU capacities complexify this somewhat; the following sections will
expand on these.

2.2 Frequency invariance
------------------------

One issue that needs to be taken into account is that a workload's duty cycle is
directly impacted by the current OPP the CPU is running at. Consider running a
periodic workload at a given frequency F::

  CPU work ^
           |     ____                ____                ____
           |    |    |              |    |              |    |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+-> time

This yields duty_cycle(p) == 25%.

Now, consider running the *same* workload at frequency F/2::

  CPU work ^
           |     _________           _________           ____
           |    |         |         |         |         |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+-> time

This yields duty_cycle(p) == 50%, despite the task having the exact same
behaviour (i.e. executing the same amount of work) in both executions.

The task utilization signal can be made frequency invariant using the following
formula::

  task_util_freq_inv(p) = duty_cycle(p) * (curr_frequency(cpu) / max_frequency(cpu))

Applying this formula to the two examples above yields a frequency invariant
task utilization of 25%.

2.3 CPU invariance
------------------

CPU capacity has a similar effect on task utilization in that running an
identical workload on CPUs of different capacity values will yield different
duty cycles.

Consider the system described in 1.3.2., i.e.::

- capacity(CPU0) = C
- capacity(CPU1) = C/3

Executing a given periodic workload on each CPU at their maximum frequency would
result in::

 CPU0 work ^
           |     ____                ____                ____
           |    |    |              |    |              |    |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+-> time

 CPU1 work ^
           |     ______________      ______________      ____
           |    |              |    |              |    |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+-> time

IOW,

- duty_cycle(p) == 25% if p runs on CPU0 at its maximum frequency
- duty_cycle(p) == 75% if p runs on CPU1 at its maximum frequency

The task utilization signal can be made CPU invariant using the following
formula::

  task_util_cpu_inv(p) = duty_cycle(p) * (capacity(cpu) / max_capacity)

with ``max_capacity`` being the highest CPU capacity value in the
system. Applying this formula to the above example above yields a CPU
invariant task utilization of 25%.

2.4 Invariant task utilization
------------------------------

Both frequency and CPU invariance need to be applied to task utilization in
order to obtain a truly invariant signal. The pseudo-formula for a task
utilization that is both CPU and frequency invariant is thus, for a given
task p::

                                     curr_frequency(cpu)   capacity(cpu)
  task_util_inv(p) = duty_cycle(p) * ------------------- * -------------
                                     max_frequency(cpu)    max_capacity

In other words, invariant task utilization describes the behaviour of a task as
if it were running on the highest-capacity CPU in the system, running at its
maximum frequency.

Any mention of task utilization in the following sections will imply its
invariant form.

2.5 Utilization estimation
--------------------------

Without a crystal ball, task behaviour (and thus task utilization) cannot
accurately be predicted the moment a task first becomes runnable. The CFS class
maintains a handful of CPU and task signals based on the Per-Entity Load
Tracking (PELT) mechanism, one of those yielding an *average* utilization (as
opposed to instantaneous).

This means that while the capacity aware scheduling criteria will be written
considering a "true" task utilization (using a crystal ball), the implementation
will only ever be able to use an estimator thereof.

3. Capacity aware scheduling requirements
=========================================

3.1 CPU capacity
----------------

Linux cannot currently figure out CPU capacity on its own, this information thus
needs to be handed to it. Architectures must define arch_scale_cpu_capacity()
for that purpose.

The arm, arm64, and RISC-V architectures directly map this to the arch_topology driver
CPU scaling data, which is derived from the capacity-dmips-mhz CPU binding; see
Documentation/devicetree/bindings/cpu/cpu-capacity.txt.

3.2 Frequency invariance
------------------------

As stated in 2.2, capacity-aware scheduling requires a frequency-invariant task
utilization. Architectures must define arch_scale_freq_capacity(cpu) for that
purpose.

Implementing this function requires figuring out at which frequency each CPU
have been running at. One way to implement this is to leverage hardware counters
whose increment rate scale with a CPU's current frequency (APERF/MPERF on x86,
AMU on arm64). Another is to directly hook into cpufreq frequency transitions,
when the kernel is aware of the switched-to frequency (also employed by
arm/arm64).

4. Scheduler topology
=====================

During the construction of the sched domains, the scheduler will figure out
whether the system exhibits asymmetric CPU capacities. Should that be the
case:

- The sched_asym_cpucapacity static key will be enabled.
- The SD_ASYM_CPUCAPACITY_FULL flag will be set at the lowest sched_domain
  level that spans all unique CPU capacity values.
- The SD_ASYM_CPUCAPACITY flag will be set for any sched_domain that spans
  CPUs with any range of asymmetry.

The sched_asym_cpucapacity static key is intended to guard sections of code that
cater to asymmetric CPU capacity systems. Do note however that said key is
*system-wide*. Imagine the following setup using cpusets::

  capacity    C/2          C
            ________    ________
           /        \  /        \
  CPUs     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
           \__/  \______________/
  cpusets   cs0         cs1

Which could be created via:

.. code-block:: sh

  mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset/cs0
  echo 0-1 > /sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset/cs0/cpuset.cpus
  echo 0 > /sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset/cs0/cpuset.mems

  mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset/cs1
  echo 2-7 > /sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset/cs1/cpuset.cpus
  echo 0 > /sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset/cs1/cpuset.mems

  echo 0 > /sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset/cpuset.sched_load_balance

Since there *is* CPU capacity asymmetry in the system, the
sched_asym_cpucapacity static key will be enabled. However, the sched_domain
hierarchy of CPUs 0-1 spans a single capacity value: SD_ASYM_CPUCAPACITY isn't
set in that hierarchy, it describes an SMP island and should be treated as such.

Therefore, the 'canonical' pattern for protecting codepaths that cater to
asymmetric CPU capacities is to:

- Check the sched_asym_cpucapacity static key
- If it is enabled, then also check for the presence of SD_ASYM_CPUCAPACITY in
  the sched_domain hierarchy (if relevant, i.e. the codepath targets a specific
  CPU or group thereof)

5. Capacity aware scheduling implementation
===========================================

5.1 CFS
-------

5.1.1 Capacity fitness
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The main capacity scheduling criterion of CFS is::

  task_util(p) < capacity(task_cpu(p))

This is commonly called the capacity fitness criterion, i.e. CFS must ensure a
task "fits" on its CPU. If it is violated, the task will need to achieve more
work than what its CPU can provide: it will be CPU-bound.

Furthermore, uclamp lets userspace specify a minimum and a maximum utilization
value for a task, either via sched_setattr() or via the cgroup interface (see
Documentation/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.rst). As its name imply, this can be used to
clamp task_util() in the previous criterion.

5.1.2 Wakeup CPU selection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

CFS task wakeup CPU selection follows the capacity fitness criterion described
above. On top of that, uclamp is used to clamp the task utilization values,
which lets userspace have more leverage over the CPU selection of CFS
tasks. IOW, CFS wakeup CPU selection searches for a CPU that satisfies::

  clamp(task_util(p), task_uclamp_min(p), task_uclamp_max(p)) < capacity(cpu)

By using uclamp, userspace can e.g. allow a busy loop (100% utilization) to run
on any CPU by giving it a low uclamp.max value. Conversely, it can force a small
periodic task (e.g. 10% utilization) to run on the highest-performance CPUs by
giving it a high uclamp.min value.

.. note::

  Wakeup CPU selection in CFS can be eclipsed by Energy Aware Scheduling
  (EAS), which is described in Documentation/scheduler/sched-energy.rst.

5.1.3 Load balancing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A pathological case in the wakeup CPU selection occurs when a task rarely
sleeps, if at all - it thus rarely wakes up, if at all. Consider::

  w == wakeup event

  capacity(CPU0) = C
  capacity(CPU1) = C / 3

                           workload on CPU0
  CPU work ^
           |     _________           _________           ____
           |    |         |         |         |         |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+-> time
                w                   w                   w

                           workload on CPU1
  CPU work ^
           |     ____________________________________________
           |    |
           +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+->
                w

This workload should run on CPU0, but if the task either:

- was improperly scheduled from the start (inaccurate initial
  utilization estimation)
- was properly scheduled from the start, but suddenly needs more
  processing power

then it might become CPU-bound, IOW ``task_util(p) > capacity(task_cpu(p))``;
the CPU capacity scheduling criterion is violated, and there may not be any more
wakeup event to fix this up via wakeup CPU selection.

Tasks that are in this situation are dubbed "misfit" tasks, and the mechanism
put in place to handle this shares the same name. Misfit task migration
leverages the CFS load balancer, more specifically the active load balance part
(which caters to migrating currently running tasks). When load balance happens,
a misfit active load balance will be triggered if a misfit task can be migrated
to a CPU with more capacity than its current one.

5.2 RT
------

5.2.1 Wakeup CPU selection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

RT task wakeup CPU selection searches for a CPU that satisfies::

  task_uclamp_min(p) <= capacity(task_cpu(cpu))

while still following the usual priority constraints. If none of the candidate
CPUs can satisfy this capacity criterion, then strict priority based scheduling
is followed and CPU capacities are ignored.

5.3 DL
------

5.3.1 Wakeup CPU selection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

DL task wakeup CPU selection searches for a CPU that satisfies::

  task_bandwidth(p) < capacity(task_cpu(p))

while still respecting the usual bandwidth and deadline constraints. If
none of the candidate CPUs can satisfy this capacity criterion, then the
task will remain on its current CPU.
========================
Deadline Task Scheduling
========================

.. CONTENTS

    0. WARNING
    1. Overview
    2. Scheduling algorithm
      2.1 Main algorithm
      2.2 Bandwidth reclaiming
    3. Scheduling Real-Time Tasks
      3.1 Definitions
      3.2 Schedulability Analysis for Uniprocessor Systems
      3.3 Schedulability Analysis for Multiprocessor Systems
      3.4 Relationship with SCHED_DEADLINE Parameters
    4. Bandwidth management
      4.1 System-wide settings
      4.2 Task interface
      4.3 Default behavior
      4.4 Behavior of sched_yield()
    5. Tasks CPU affinity
      5.1 SCHED_DEADLINE and cpusets HOWTO
    6. Future plans
    A. Test suite
    B. Minimal main()


0. WARNING
==========

 Fiddling with these settings can result in an unpredictable or even unstable
 system behavior. As for -rt (group) scheduling, it is assumed that root users
 know what they're doing.


1. Overview
===========

 The SCHED_DEADLINE policy contained inside the sched_dl scheduling class is
 basically an implementation of the Earliest Deadline First (EDF) scheduling
 algorithm, augmented with a mechanism (called Constant Bandwidth Server, CBS)
 that makes it possible to isolate the behavior of tasks between each other.


2. Scheduling algorithm
=======================

2.1 Main algorithm
------------------

 SCHED_DEADLINE [18] uses three parameters, named "runtime", "period", and
 "deadline", to schedule tasks. A SCHED_DEADLINE task should receive
 "runtime" microseconds of execution time every "period" microseconds, and
 these "runtime" microseconds are available within "deadline" microseconds
 from the beginning of the period.  In order to implement this behavior,
 every time the task wakes up, the scheduler computes a "scheduling deadline"
 consistent with the guarantee (using the CBS[2,3] algorithm). Tasks are then
 scheduled using EDF[1] on these scheduling deadlines (the task with the
 earliest scheduling deadline is selected for execution). Notice that the
 task actually receives "runtime" time units within "deadline" if a proper
 "admission control" strategy (see Section "4. Bandwidth management") is used
 (clearly, if the system is overloaded this guarantee cannot be respected).

 Summing up, the CBS[2,3] algorithm assigns scheduling deadlines to tasks so
 that each task runs for at most its runtime every period, avoiding any
 interference between different tasks (bandwidth isolation), while the EDF[1]
 algorithm selects the task with the earliest scheduling deadline as the one
 to be executed next. Thanks to this feature, tasks that do not strictly comply
 with the "traditional" real-time task model (see Section 3) can effectively
 use the new policy.

 In more details, the CBS algorithm assigns scheduling deadlines to
 tasks in the following way:

  - Each SCHED_DEADLINE task is characterized by the "runtime",
    "deadline", and "period" parameters;

  - The state of the task is described by a "scheduling deadline", and
    a "remaining runtime". These two parameters are initially set to 0;

  - When a SCHED_DEADLINE task wakes up (becomes ready for execution),
    the scheduler checks if::

                 remaining runtime                  runtime
        ----------------------------------    >    ---------
        scheduling deadline - current time           period

    then, if the scheduling deadline is smaller than the current time, or
    this condition is verified, the scheduling deadline and the
    remaining runtime are re-initialized as

         scheduling deadline = current time + deadline
         remaining runtime = runtime

    otherwise, the scheduling deadline and the remaining runtime are
    left unchanged;

  - When a SCHED_DEADLINE task executes for an amount of time t, its
    remaining runtime is decreased as::

         remaining runtime = remaining runtime - t

    (technically, the runtime is decreased at every tick, or when the
    task is descheduled / preempted);

  - When the remaining runtime becomes less or equal than 0, the task is
    said to be "throttled" (also known as "depleted" in real-time literature)
    and cannot be scheduled until its scheduling deadline. The "replenishment
    time" for this task (see next item) is set to be equal to the current
    value of the scheduling deadline;

  - When the current time is equal to the replenishment time of a
    throttled task, the scheduling deadline and the remaining runtime are
    updated as::

         scheduling deadline = scheduling deadline + period
         remaining runtime = remaining runtime + runtime

 The SCHED_FLAG_DL_OVERRUN flag in sched_attr's sched_flags field allows a task
 to get informed about runtime overruns through the delivery of SIGXCPU
 signals.


2.2 Bandwidth reclaiming
------------------------

 Bandwidth reclaiming for deadline tasks is based on the GRUB (Greedy
 Reclamation of Unused Bandwidth) algorithm [15, 16, 17] and it is enabled
 when flag SCHED_FLAG_RECLAIM is set.

 The following diagram illustrates the state names for tasks handled by GRUB::

                             ------------
                 (d)        |   Active   |
              ------------->|            |
              |             | Contending |
              |              ------------
              |                A      |
          ----------           |      |
         |          |          |      |
         | Inactive |          |(b)   | (a)
         |          |          |      |
          ----------           |      |
              A                |      V
              |              ------------
              |             |   Active   |
              --------------|     Non    |
                 (c)        | Contending |
                             ------------

 A task can be in one of the following states:

  - ActiveContending: if it is ready for execution (or executing);

  - ActiveNonContending: if it just blocked and has not yet surpassed the 0-lag
    time;

  - Inactive: if it is blocked and has surpassed the 0-lag time.

 State transitions:

  (a) When a task blocks, it does not become immediately inactive since its
      bandwidth cannot be immediately reclaimed without breaking the
      real-time guarantees. It therefore enters a transitional state called
      ActiveNonContending. The scheduler arms the "inactive timer" to fire at
      the 0-lag time, when the task's bandwidth can be reclaimed without
      breaking the real-time guarantees.

      The 0-lag time for a task entering the ActiveNonContending state is
      computed as::

                        (runtime * dl_period)
             deadline - ---------------------
                             dl_runtime

      where runtime is the remaining runtime, while dl_runtime and dl_period
      are the reservation parameters.

  (b) If the task wakes up before the inactive timer fires, the task re-enters
      the ActiveContending state and the "inactive timer" is canceled.
      In addition, if the task wakes up on a different runqueue, then
      the task's utilization must be removed from the previous runqueue's active
      utilization and must be added to the new runqueue's active utilization.
      In order to avoid races between a task waking up on a runqueue while the
      "inactive timer" is running on a different CPU, the "dl_non_contending"
      flag is used to indicate that a task is not on a runqueue but is active
      (so, the flag is set when the task blocks and is cleared when the
      "inactive timer" fires or when the task  wakes up).

  (c) When the "inactive timer" fires, the task enters the Inactive state and
      its utilization is removed from the runqueue's active utilization.

  (d) When an inactive task wakes up, it enters the ActiveContending state and
      its utilization is added to the active utilization of the runqueue where
      it has been enqueued.

 For each runqueue, the algorithm GRUB keeps track of two different bandwidths:

  - Active bandwidth (running_bw): this is the sum of the bandwidths of all
    tasks in active state (i.e., ActiveContending or ActiveNonContending);

  - Total bandwidth (this_bw): this is the sum of all tasks "belonging" to the
    runqueue, including the tasks in Inactive state.

  - Maximum usable bandwidth (max_bw): This is the maximum bandwidth usable by
    deadline tasks and is currently set to the RT capacity.


 The algorithm reclaims the bandwidth of the tasks in Inactive state.
 It does so by decrementing the runtime of the executing task Ti at a pace equal
 to

           dq = -(max{ Ui, (Umax - Uinact - Uextra) } / Umax) dt

 where:

  - Ui is the bandwidth of task Ti;
  - Umax is the maximum reclaimable utilization (subjected to RT throttling
    limits);
  - Uinact is the (per runqueue) inactive utilization, computed as
    (this_bq - running_bw);
  - Uextra is the (per runqueue) extra reclaimable utilization
    (subjected to RT throttling limits).


 Let's now see a trivial example of two deadline tasks with runtime equal
 to 4 and period equal to 8 (i.e., bandwidth equal to 0.5)::

         A            Task T1
         |
         |                               |
         |                               |
         |--------                       |----
         |       |                       V
         |---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--------->t
         0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8


         A            Task T2
         |
         |                               |
         |                               |
         |       ------------------------|
         |       |                       V
         |---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--------->t
         0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8


         A            running_bw
         |
       1 -----------------               ------
         |               |               |
      0.5-               -----------------
         |                               |
         |---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--------->t
         0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8


  - Time t = 0:

    Both tasks are ready for execution and therefore in ActiveContending state.
    Suppose Task T1 is the first task to start execution.
    Since there are no inactive tasks, its runtime is decreased as dq = -1 dt.

  - Time t = 2:

    Suppose that task T1 blocks
    Task T1 therefore enters the ActiveNonContending state. Since its remaining
    runtime is equal to 2, its 0-lag time is equal to t = 4.
    Task T2 start execution, with runtime still decreased as dq = -1 dt since
    there are no inactive tasks.

  - Time t = 4:

    This is the 0-lag time for Task T1. Since it didn't woken up in the
    meantime, it enters the Inactive state. Its bandwidth is removed from
    running_bw.
    Task T2 continues its execution. However, its runtime is now decreased as
    dq = - 0.5 dt because Uinact = 0.5.
    Task T2 therefore reclaims the bandwidth unused by Task T1.

  - Time t = 8:

    Task T1 wakes up. It enters the ActiveContending state again, and the
    running_bw is incremented.


2.3 Energy-aware scheduling
---------------------------

 When cpufreq's schedutil governor is selected, SCHED_DEADLINE implements the
 GRUB-PA [19] algorithm, reducing the CPU operating frequency to the minimum
 value that still allows to meet the deadlines. This behavior is currently
 implemented only for ARM architectures.

 A particular care must be taken in case the time needed for changing frequency
 is of the same order of magnitude of the reservation period. In such cases,
 setting a fixed CPU frequency results in a lower amount of deadline misses.


3. Scheduling Real-Time Tasks
=============================



 ..  BIG FAT WARNING ******************************************************

 .. warning::

   This section contains a (not-thorough) summary on classical deadline
   scheduling theory, and how it applies to SCHED_DEADLINE.
   The reader can "safely" skip to Section 4 if only interested in seeing
   how the scheduling policy can be used. Anyway, we strongly recommend
   to come back here and continue reading (once the urge for testing is
   satisfied :P) to be sure of fully understanding all technical details.

 .. ************************************************************************

 There are no limitations on what kind of task can exploit this new
 scheduling discipline, even if it must be said that it is particularly
 suited for periodic or sporadic real-time tasks that need guarantees on their
 timing behavior, e.g., multimedia, streaming, control applications, etc.

3.1 Definitions
------------------------

 A typical real-time task is composed of a repetition of computation phases
 (task instances, or jobs) which are activated on a periodic or sporadic
 fashion.
 Each job J_j (where J_j is the j^th job of the task) is characterized by an
 arrival time r_j (the time when the job starts), an amount of computation
 time c_j needed to finish the job, and a job absolute deadline d_j, which
 is the time within which the job should be finished. The maximum execution
 time max{c_j} is called "Worst Case Execution Time" (WCET) for the task.
 A real-time task can be periodic with period P if r_{j+1} = r_j + P, or
 sporadic with minimum inter-arrival time P is r_{j+1} >= r_j + P. Finally,
 d_j = r_j + D, where D is the task's relative deadline.
 Summing up, a real-time task can be described as

	Task = (WCET, D, P)

 The utilization of a real-time task is defined as the ratio between its
 WCET and its period (or minimum inter-arrival time), and represents
 the fraction of CPU time needed to execute the task.

 If the total utilization U=sum(WCET_i/P_i) is larger than M (with M equal
 to the number of CPUs), then the scheduler is unable to respect all the
 deadlines.
 Note that total utilization is defined as the sum of the utilizations
 WCET_i/P_i over all the real-time tasks in the system. When considering
 multiple real-time tasks, the parameters of the i-th task are indicated
 with the "_i" suffix.
 Moreover, if the total utilization is larger than M, then we risk starving
 non- real-time tasks by real-time tasks.
 If, instead, the total utilization is smaller than M, then non real-time
 tasks will not be starved and the system might be able to respect all the
 deadlines.
 As a matter of fact, in this case it is possible to provide an upper bound
 for tardiness (defined as the maximum between 0 and the difference
 between the finishing time of a job and its absolute deadline).
 More precisely, it can be proven that using a global EDF scheduler the
 maximum tardiness of each task is smaller or equal than

	((M − 1) · WCET_max − WCET_min)/(M − (M − 2) · U_max) + WCET_max

 where WCET_max = max{WCET_i} is the maximum WCET, WCET_min=min{WCET_i}
 is the minimum WCET, and U_max = max{WCET_i/P_i} is the maximum
 utilization[12].

3.2 Schedulability Analysis for Uniprocessor Systems
----------------------------------------------------

 If M=1 (uniprocessor system), or in case of partitioned scheduling (each
 real-time task is statically assigned to one and only one CPU), it is
 possible to formally check if all the deadlines are respected.
 If D_i = P_i for all tasks, then EDF is able to respect all the deadlines
 of all the tasks executing on a CPU if and only if the total utilization
 of the tasks running on such a CPU is smaller or equal than 1.
 If D_i != P_i for some task, then it is possible to define the density of
 a task as WCET_i/min{D_i,P_i}, and EDF is able to respect all the deadlines
 of all the tasks running on a CPU if the sum of the densities of the tasks
 running on such a CPU is smaller or equal than 1:

	sum(WCET_i / min{D_i, P_i}) <= 1

 It is important to notice that this condition is only sufficient, and not
 necessary: there are task sets that are schedulable, but do not respect the
 condition. For example, consider the task set {Task_1,Task_2} composed by
 Task_1=(50ms,50ms,100ms) and Task_2=(10ms,100ms,100ms).
 EDF is clearly able to schedule the two tasks without missing any deadline
 (Task_1 is scheduled as soon as it is released, and finishes just in time
 to respect its deadline; Task_2 is scheduled immediately after Task_1, hence
 its response time cannot be larger than 50ms + 10ms = 60ms) even if

	50 / min{50,100} + 10 / min{100, 100} = 50 / 50 + 10 / 100 = 1.1

 Of course it is possible to test the exact schedulability of tasks with
 D_i != P_i (checking a condition that is both sufficient and necessary),
 but this cannot be done by comparing the total utilization or density with
 a constant. Instead, the so called "processor demand" approach can be used,
 computing the total amount of CPU time h(t) needed by all the tasks to
 respect all of their deadlines in a time interval of size t, and comparing
 such a time with the interval size t. If h(t) is smaller than t (that is,
 the amount of time needed by the tasks in a time interval of size t is
 smaller than the size of the interval) for all the possible values of t, then
 EDF is able to schedule the tasks respecting all of their deadlines. Since
 performing this check for all possible values of t is impossible, it has been
 proven[4,5,6] that it is sufficient to perform the test for values of t
 between 0 and a maximum value L. The cited papers contain all of the
 mathematical details and explain how to compute h(t) and L.
 In any case, this kind of analysis is too complex as well as too
 time-consuming to be performed on-line. Hence, as explained in Section
 4 Linux uses an admission test based on the tasks' utilizations.

3.3 Schedulability Analysis for Multiprocessor Systems
------------------------------------------------------

 On multiprocessor systems with global EDF scheduling (non partitioned
 systems), a sufficient test for schedulability can not be based on the
 utilizations or densities: it can be shown that even if D_i = P_i task
 sets with utilizations slightly larger than 1 can miss deadlines regardless
 of the number of CPUs.

 Consider a set {Task_1,...Task_{M+1}} of M+1 tasks on a system with M
 CPUs, with the first task Task_1=(P,P,P) having period, relative deadline
 and WCET equal to P. The remaining M tasks Task_i=(e,P-1,P-1) have an
 arbitrarily small worst case execution time (indicated as "e" here) and a
 period smaller than the one of the first task. Hence, if all the tasks
 activate at the same time t, global EDF schedules these M tasks first
 (because their absolute deadlines are equal to t + P - 1, hence they are
 smaller than the absolute deadline of Task_1, which is t + P). As a
 result, Task_1 can be scheduled only at time t + e, and will finish at
 time t + e + P, after its absolute deadline. The total utilization of the
 task set is U = M · e / (P - 1) + P / P = M · e / (P - 1) + 1, and for small
 values of e this can become very close to 1. This is known as "Dhall's
 effect"[7]. Note: the example in the original paper by Dhall has been
 slightly simplified here (for example, Dhall more correctly computed
 lim_{e->0}U).

 More complex schedulability tests for global EDF have been developed in
 real-time literature[8,9], but they are not based on a simple comparison
 between total utilization (or density) and a fixed constant. If all tasks
 have D_i = P_i, a sufficient schedulability condition can be expressed in
 a simple way:

	sum(WCET_i / P_i) <= M - (M - 1) · U_max

 where U_max = max{WCET_i / P_i}[10]. Notice that for U_max = 1,
 M - (M - 1) · U_max becomes M - M + 1 = 1 and this schedulability condition
 just confirms the Dhall's effect. A more complete survey of the literature
 about schedulability tests for multi-processor real-time scheduling can be
 found in [11].

 As seen, enforcing that the total utilization is smaller than M does not
 guarantee that global EDF schedules the tasks without missing any deadline
 (in other words, global EDF is not an optimal scheduling algorithm). However,
 a total utilization smaller than M is enough to guarantee that non real-time
 tasks are not starved and that the tardiness of real-time tasks has an upper
 bound[12] (as previously noted). Different bounds on the maximum tardiness
 experienced by real-time tasks have been developed in various papers[13,14],
 but the theoretical result that is important for SCHED_DEADLINE is that if
 the total utilization is smaller or equal than M then the response times of
 the tasks are limited.

3.4 Relationship with SCHED_DEADLINE Parameters
-----------------------------------------------

 Finally, it is important to understand the relationship between the
 SCHED_DEADLINE scheduling parameters described in Section 2 (runtime,
 deadline and period) and the real-time task parameters (WCET, D, P)
 described in this section. Note that the tasks' temporal constraints are
 represented by its absolute deadlines d_j = r_j + D described above, while
 SCHED_DEADLINE schedules the tasks according to scheduling deadlines (see
 Section 2).
 If an admission test is used to guarantee that the scheduling deadlines
 are respected, then SCHED_DEADLINE can be used to schedule real-time tasks
 guaranteeing that all the jobs' deadlines of a task are respected.
 In order to do this, a task must be scheduled by setting:

  - runtime >= WCET
  - deadline = D
  - period <= P

 IOW, if runtime >= WCET and if period is <= P, then the scheduling deadlines
 and the absolute deadlines (d_j) coincide, so a proper admission control
 allows to respect the jobs' absolute deadlines for this task (this is what is
 called "hard schedulability property" and is an extension of Lemma 1 of [2]).
 Notice that if runtime > deadline the admission control will surely reject
 this task, as it is not possible to respect its temporal constraints.

 References:

  1 - C. L. Liu and J. W. Layland. Scheduling algorithms for multiprogram-
      ming in a hard-real-time environment. Journal of the Association for
      Computing Machinery, 20(1), 1973.
  2 - L. Abeni , G. Buttazzo. Integrating Multimedia Applications in Hard
      Real-Time Systems. Proceedings of the 19th IEEE Real-time Systems
      Symposium, 1998. http://retis.sssup.it/~giorgio/paps/1998/rtss98-cbs.pdf
  3 - L. Abeni. Server Mechanisms for Multimedia Applications. ReTiS Lab
      Technical Report. http://disi.unitn.it/~abeni/tr-98-01.pdf
  4 - J. Y. Leung and M.L. Merril. A Note on Preemptive Scheduling of
      Periodic, Real-Time Tasks. Information Processing Letters, vol. 11,
      no. 3, pp. 115-118, 1980.
  5 - S. K. Baruah, A. K. Mok and L. E. Rosier. Preemptively Scheduling
      Hard-Real-Time Sporadic Tasks on One Processor. Proceedings of the
      11th IEEE Real-time Systems Symposium, 1990.
  6 - S. K. Baruah, L. E. Rosier and R. R. Howell. Algorithms and Complexity
      Concerning the Preemptive Scheduling of Periodic Real-Time tasks on
      One Processor. Real-Time Systems Journal, vol. 4, no. 2, pp 301-324,
      1990.
  7 - S. J. Dhall and C. L. Liu. On a real-time scheduling problem. Operations
      research, vol. 26, no. 1, pp 127-140, 1978.
  8 - T. Baker. Multiprocessor EDF and Deadline Monotonic Schedulability
      Analysis. Proceedings of the 24th IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium, 2003.
  9 - T. Baker. An Analysis of EDF Schedulability on a Multiprocessor.
      IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 16, no. 8,
      pp 760-768, 2005.
  10 - J. Goossens, S. Funk and S. Baruah, Priority-Driven Scheduling of
       Periodic Task Systems on Multiprocessors. Real-Time Systems Journal,
       vol. 25, no. 2–3, pp. 187–205, 2003.
  11 - R. Davis and A. Burns. A Survey of Hard Real-Time Scheduling for
       Multiprocessor Systems. ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 43, no. 4, 2011.
       http://www-users.cs.york.ac.uk/~robdavis/papers/MPSurveyv5.0.pdf
  12 - U. C. Devi and J. H. Anderson. Tardiness Bounds under Global EDF
       Scheduling on a Multiprocessor. Real-Time Systems Journal, vol. 32,
       no. 2, pp 133-189, 2008.
  13 - P. Valente and G. Lipari. An Upper Bound to the Lateness of Soft
       Real-Time Tasks Scheduled by EDF on Multiprocessors. Proceedings of
       the 26th IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium, 2005.
  14 - J. Erickson, U. Devi and S. Baruah. Improved tardiness bounds for
       Global EDF. Proceedings of the 22nd Euromicro Conference on
       Real-Time Systems, 2010.
  15 - G. Lipari, S. Baruah, Greedy reclamation of unused bandwidth in
       constant-bandwidth servers, 12th IEEE Euromicro Conference on Real-Time
       Systems, 2000.
  16 - L. Abeni, J. Lelli, C. Scordino, L. Palopoli, Greedy CPU reclaiming for
       SCHED DEADLINE. In Proceedings of the Real-Time Linux Workshop (RTLWS),
       Dusseldorf, Germany, 2014.
  17 - L. Abeni, G. Lipari, A. Parri, Y. Sun, Multicore CPU reclaiming: parallel
       or sequential?. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on Applied
       Computing, 2016.
  18 - J. Lelli, C. Scordino, L. Abeni, D. Faggioli, Deadline scheduling in the
       Linux kernel, Software: Practice and Experience, 46(6): 821-839, June
       2016.
  19 - C. Scordino, L. Abeni, J. Lelli, Energy-Aware Real-Time Scheduling in
       the Linux Kernel, 33rd ACM/SIGAPP Symposium On Applied Computing (SAC
       2018), Pau, France, April 2018.


4. Bandwidth management
=======================

 As previously mentioned, in order for -deadline scheduling to be
 effective and useful (that is, to be able to provide "runtime" time units
 within "deadline"), it is important to have some method to keep the allocation
 of the available fractions of CPU time to the various tasks under control.
 This is usually called "admission control" and if it is not performed, then
 no guarantee can be given on the actual scheduling of the -deadline tasks.

 As already stated in Section 3, a necessary condition to be respected to
 correctly schedule a set of real-time tasks is that the total utilization
 is smaller than M. When talking about -deadline tasks, this requires that
 the sum of the ratio between runtime and period for all tasks is smaller
 than M. Notice that the ratio runtime/period is equivalent to the utilization
 of a "traditional" real-time task, and is also often referred to as
 "bandwidth".
 The interface used to control the CPU bandwidth that can be allocated
 to -deadline tasks is similar to the one already used for -rt
 tasks with real-time group scheduling (a.k.a. RT-throttling - see
 Documentation/scheduler/sched-rt-group.rst), and is based on readable/
 writable control files located in procfs (for system wide settings).
 Notice that per-group settings (controlled through cgroupfs) are still not
 defined for -deadline tasks, because more discussion is needed in order to
 figure out how we want to manage SCHED_DEADLINE bandwidth at the task group
 level.

 A main difference between deadline bandwidth management and RT-throttling
 is that -deadline tasks have bandwidth on their own (while -rt ones don't!),
 and thus we don't need a higher level throttling mechanism to enforce the
 desired bandwidth. In other words, this means that interface parameters are
 only used at admission control time (i.e., when the user calls
 sched_setattr()). Scheduling is then performed considering actual tasks'
 parameters, so that CPU bandwidth is allocated to SCHED_DEADLINE tasks
 respecting their needs in terms of granularity. Therefore, using this simple
 interface we can put a cap on total utilization of -deadline tasks (i.e.,
 \Sum (runtime_i / period_i) < global_dl_utilization_cap).

4.1 System wide settings
------------------------

 The system wide settings are configured under the /proc virtual file system.

 For now the -rt knobs are used for -deadline admission control and the
 -deadline runtime is accounted against the -rt runtime. We realize that this
 isn't entirely desirable; however, it is better to have a small interface for
 now, and be able to change it easily later. The ideal situation (see 5.) is to
 run -rt tasks from a -deadline server; in which case the -rt bandwidth is a
 direct subset of dl_bw.

 This means that, for a root_domain comprising M CPUs, -deadline tasks
 can be created while the sum of their bandwidths stays below:

   M * (sched_rt_runtime_us / sched_rt_period_us)

 It is also possible to disable this bandwidth management logic, and
 be thus free of oversubscribing the system up to any arbitrary level.
 This is done by writing -1 in /proc/sys/kernel/sched_rt_runtime_us.


4.2 Task interface
------------------

 Specifying a periodic/sporadic task that executes for a given amount of
 runtime at each instance, and that is scheduled according to the urgency of
 its own timing constraints needs, in general, a way of declaring:

  - a (maximum/typical) instance execution time,
  - a minimum interval between consecutive instances,
  - a time constraint by which each instance must be completed.

 Therefore:

  * a new struct sched_attr, containing all the necessary fields is
    provided;
  * the new scheduling related syscalls that manipulate it, i.e.,
    sched_setattr() and sched_getattr() are implemented.

 For debugging purposes, the leftover runtime and absolute deadline of a
 SCHED_DEADLINE task can be retrieved through /proc/<pid>/sched (entries
 dl.runtime and dl.deadline, both values in ns). A programmatic way to
 retrieve these values from production code is under discussion.


4.3 Default behavior
---------------------

 The default value for SCHED_DEADLINE bandwidth is to have rt_runtime equal to
 950000. With rt_period equal to 1000000, by default, it means that -deadline
 tasks can use at most 95%, multiplied by the number of CPUs that compose the
 root_domain, for each root_domain.
 This means that non -deadline tasks will receive at least 5% of the CPU time,
 and that -deadline tasks will receive their runtime with a guaranteed
 worst-case delay respect to the "deadline" parameter. If "deadline" = "period"
 and the cpuset mechanism is used to implement partitioned scheduling (see
 Section 5), then this simple setting of the bandwidth management is able to
 deterministically guarantee that -deadline tasks will receive their runtime
 in a period.

 Finally, notice that in order not to jeopardize the admission control a
 -deadline task cannot fork.


4.4 Behavior of sched_yield()
-----------------------------

 When a SCHED_DEADLINE task calls sched_yield(), it gives up its
 remaining runtime and is immediately throttled, until the next
 period, when its runtime will be replenished (a special flag
 dl_yielded is set and used to handle correctly throttling and runtime
 replenishment after a call to sched_yield()).

 This behavior of sched_yield() allows the task to wake-up exactly at
 the beginning of the next period. Also, this may be useful in the
 future with bandwidth reclaiming mechanisms, where sched_yield() will
 make the leftoever runtime available for reclamation by other
 SCHED_DEADLINE tasks.


5. Tasks CPU affinity
=====================

 -deadline tasks cannot have an affinity mask smaller that the entire
 root_domain they are created on. However, affinities can be specified
 through the cpuset facility (Documentation/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/cpusets.rst).

5.1 SCHED_DEADLINE and cpusets HOWTO
------------------------------------

 An example of a simple configuration (pin a -deadline task to CPU0)
 follows (rt-app is used to create a -deadline task)::

   mkdir /dev/cpuset
   mount -t cgroup -o cpuset cpuset /dev/cpuset
   cd /dev/cpuset
   mkdir cpu0
   echo 0 > cpu0/cpuset.cpus
   echo 0 > cpu0/cpuset.mems
   echo 1 > cpuset.cpu_exclusive
   echo 0 > cpuset.sched_load_balance
   echo 1 > cpu0/cpuset.cpu_exclusive
   echo 1 > cpu0/cpuset.mem_exclusive
   echo $$ > cpu0/tasks
   rt-app -t 100000:10000:d:0 -D5 # it is now actually superfluous to specify
				  # task affinity

6. Future plans
===============

 Still missing:

  - programmatic way to retrieve current runtime and absolute deadline
  - refinements to deadline inheritance, especially regarding the possibility
    of retaining bandwidth isolation among non-interacting tasks. This is
    being studied from both theoretical and practical points of view, and
    hopefully we should be able to produce some demonstrative code soon;
  - (c)group based bandwidth management, and maybe scheduling;
  - access control for non-root users (and related security concerns to
    address), which is the best way to allow unprivileged use of the mechanisms
    and how to prevent non-root users "cheat" the system?

 As already discussed, we are planning also to merge this work with the EDF
 throttling patches [https://lore.kernel.org/r/cover.1266931410.git.fabio@helm.retis] but we still are in
 the preliminary phases of the merge and we really seek feedback that would
 help us decide on the direction it should take.

Appendix A. Test suite
======================

 The SCHED_DEADLINE policy can be easily tested using two applications that
 are part of a wider Linux Scheduler validation suite. The suite is
 available as a GitHub repository: https://github.com/scheduler-tools.

 The first testing application is called rt-app and can be used to
 start multiple threads with specific parameters. rt-app supports
 SCHED_{OTHER,FIFO,RR,DEADLINE} scheduling policies and their related
 parameters (e.g., niceness, priority, runtime/deadline/period). rt-app
 is a valuable tool, as it can be used to synthetically recreate certain
 workloads (maybe mimicking real use-cases) and evaluate how the scheduler
 behaves under such workloads. In this way, results are easily reproducible.
 rt-app is available at: https://github.com/scheduler-tools/rt-app.

 Thread parameters can be specified from the command line, with something like
 this::

  # rt-app -t 100000:10000:d -t 150000:20000:f:10 -D5

 The above creates 2 threads. The first one, scheduled by SCHED_DEADLINE,
 executes for 10ms every 100ms. The second one, scheduled at SCHED_FIFO
 priority 10, executes for 20ms every 150ms. The test will run for a total
 of 5 seconds.

 More interestingly, configurations can be described with a json file that
 can be passed as input to rt-app with something like this::

  # rt-app my_config.json

 The parameters that can be specified with the second method are a superset
 of the command line options. Please refer to rt-app documentation for more
 details (`<rt-app-sources>/doc/*.json`).

 The second testing application is done using chrt which has support
 for SCHED_DEADLINE.

 The usage is straightforward::

  # chrt -d -T 10000000 -D 100000000 0 ./my_cpuhog_app

 With this, my_cpuhog_app is put to run inside a SCHED_DEADLINE reservation
 of 10ms every 100ms (note that parameters are expressed in nanoseconds).
 You can also use chrt to create a reservation for an already running
 application, given that you know its pid::

  # chrt -d -T 10000000 -D 100000000 -p 0 my_app_pid

Appendix B. Minimal main()
==========================

 We provide in what follows a simple (ugly) self-contained code snippet
 showing how SCHED_DEADLINE reservations can be created by a real-time
 application developer::

   #define _GNU_SOURCE
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <string.h>
   #include <time.h>
   #include <linux/unistd.h>
   #include <linux/kernel.h>
   #include <linux/types.h>
   #include <sys/syscall.h>
   #include <pthread.h>

   #define gettid() syscall(__NR_gettid)

   #define SCHED_DEADLINE	6

   /* XXX use the proper syscall numbers */
   #ifdef __x86_64__
   #define __NR_sched_setattr		314
   #define __NR_sched_getattr		315
   #endif

   #ifdef __i386__
   #define __NR_sched_setattr		351
   #define __NR_sched_getattr		352
   #endif

   #ifdef __arm__
   #define __NR_sched_setattr		380
   #define __NR_sched_getattr		381
   #endif

   static volatile int done;

   struct sched_attr {
	__u32 size;

	__u32 sched_policy;
	__u64 sched_flags;

	/* SCHED_NORMAL, SCHED_BATCH */
	__s32 sched_nice;

	/* SCHED_FIFO, SCHED_RR */
	__u32 sched_priority;

	/* SCHED_DEADLINE (nsec) */
	__u64 sched_runtime;
	__u64 sched_deadline;
	__u64 sched_period;
   };

   int sched_setattr(pid_t pid,
		  const struct sched_attr *attr,
		  unsigned int flags)
   {
	return syscall(__NR_sched_setattr, pid, attr, flags);
   }

   int sched_getattr(pid_t pid,
		  struct sched_attr *attr,
		  unsigned int size,
		  unsigned int flags)
   {
	return syscall(__NR_sched_getattr, pid, attr, size, flags);
   }

   void *run_deadline(void *data)
   {
	struct sched_attr attr;
	int x = 0;
	int ret;
	unsigned int flags = 0;

	printf("deadline thread started [%ld]\n", gettid());

	attr.size = sizeof(attr);
	attr.sched_flags = 0;
	attr.sched_nice = 0;
	attr.sched_priority = 0;

	/* This creates a 10ms/30ms reservation */
	attr.sched_policy = SCHED_DEADLINE;
	attr.sched_runtime = 10 * 1000 * 1000;
	attr.sched_period = attr.sched_deadline = 30 * 1000 * 1000;

	ret = sched_setattr(0, &attr, flags);
	if (ret < 0) {
		done = 0;
		perror("sched_setattr");
		exit(-1);
	}

	while (!done) {
		x++;
	}

	printf("deadline thread dies [%ld]\n", gettid());
	return NULL;
   }

   int main (int argc, char **argv)
   {
	pthread_t thread;

	printf("main thread [%ld]\n", gettid());

	pthread_create(&thread, NULL, run_deadline, NULL);

	sleep(10);

	done = 1;
	pthread_join(thread, NULL);

	printf("main dies [%ld]\n", gettid());
	return 0;
   }
=================
Scheduler debugfs
=================

Booting a kernel with CONFIG_SCHED_DEBUG=y will give access to
scheduler specific debug files under /sys/kernel/debug/sched. Some of
those files are described below.

numa_balancing
==============

`numa_balancing` directory is used to hold files to control NUMA
balancing feature.  If the system overhead from the feature is too
high then the rate the kernel samples for NUMA hinting faults may be
controlled by the `scan_period_min_ms, scan_delay_ms,
scan_period_max_ms, scan_size_mb` files.


scan_period_min_ms, scan_delay_ms, scan_period_max_ms, scan_size_mb
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Automatic NUMA balancing scans tasks address space and unmaps pages to
detect if pages are properly placed or if the data should be migrated to a
memory node local to where the task is running.  Every "scan delay" the task
scans the next "scan size" number of pages in its address space. When the
end of the address space is reached the scanner restarts from the beginning.

In combination, the "scan delay" and "scan size" determine the scan rate.
When "scan delay" decreases, the scan rate increases.  The scan delay and
hence the scan rate of every task is adaptive and depends on historical
behaviour. If pages are properly placed then the scan delay increases,
otherwise the scan delay decreases.  The "scan size" is not adaptive but
the higher the "scan size", the higher the scan rate.

Higher scan rates incur higher system overhead as page faults must be
trapped and potentially data must be migrated. However, the higher the scan
rate, the more quickly a tasks memory is migrated to a local node if the
workload pattern changes and minimises performance impact due to remote
memory accesses. These files control the thresholds for scan delays and
the number of pages scanned.

``scan_period_min_ms`` is the minimum time in milliseconds to scan a
tasks virtual memory. It effectively controls the maximum scanning
rate for each task.

``scan_delay_ms`` is the starting "scan delay" used for a task when it
initially forks.

``scan_period_max_ms`` is the maximum time in milliseconds to scan a
tasks virtual memory. It effectively controls the minimum scanning
rate for each task.

``scan_size_mb`` is how many megabytes worth of pages are scanned for
a given scan.
.. _sched_design_CFS:

=============
CFS Scheduler
=============


1.  OVERVIEW
============

CFS stands for "Completely Fair Scheduler," and is the "desktop" process
scheduler implemented by Ingo Molnar and merged in Linux 2.6.23. When
originally merged, it was the replacement for the previous vanilla
scheduler's SCHED_OTHER interactivity code. Nowadays, CFS is making room
for EEVDF, for which documentation can be found in
Documentation/scheduler/sched-eevdf.rst.

80% of CFS's design can be summed up in a single sentence: CFS basically models
an "ideal, precise multi-tasking CPU" on real hardware.

"Ideal multi-tasking CPU" is a (non-existent  :-)) CPU that has 100% physical
power and which can run each task at precise equal speed, in parallel, each at
1/nr_running speed.  For example: if there are 2 tasks running, then it runs
each at 50% physical power --- i.e., actually in parallel.

On real hardware, we can run only a single task at once, so we have to
introduce the concept of "virtual runtime."  The virtual runtime of a task
specifies when its next timeslice would start execution on the ideal
multi-tasking CPU described above.  In practice, the virtual runtime of a task
is its actual runtime normalized to the total number of running tasks.



2.  FEW IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
==============================

In CFS the virtual runtime is expressed and tracked via the per-task
p->se.vruntime (nanosec-unit) value.  This way, it's possible to accurately
timestamp and measure the "expected CPU time" a task should have gotten.

   Small detail: on "ideal" hardware, at any time all tasks would have the same
   p->se.vruntime value --- i.e., tasks would execute simultaneously and no task
   would ever get "out of balance" from the "ideal" share of CPU time.

CFS's task picking logic is based on this p->se.vruntime value and it is thus
very simple: it always tries to run the task with the smallest p->se.vruntime
value (i.e., the task which executed least so far).  CFS always tries to split
up CPU time between runnable tasks as close to "ideal multitasking hardware" as
possible.

Most of the rest of CFS's design just falls out of this really simple concept,
with a few add-on embellishments like nice levels, multiprocessing and various
algorithm variants to recognize sleepers.



3.  THE RBTREE
==============

CFS's design is quite radical: it does not use the old data structures for the
runqueues, but it uses a time-ordered rbtree to build a "timeline" of future
task execution, and thus has no "array switch" artifacts (by which both the
previous vanilla scheduler and RSDL/SD are affected).

CFS also maintains the rq->cfs.min_vruntime value, which is a monotonic
increasing value tracking the smallest vruntime among all tasks in the
runqueue.  The total amount of work done by the system is tracked using
min_vruntime; that value is used to place newly activated entities on the left
side of the tree as much as possible.

The total number of running tasks in the runqueue is accounted through the
rq->cfs.load value, which is the sum of the weights of the tasks queued on the
runqueue.

CFS maintains a time-ordered rbtree, where all runnable tasks are sorted by the
p->se.vruntime key. CFS picks the "leftmost" task from this tree and sticks to it.
As the system progresses forwards, the executed tasks are put into the tree
more and more to the right --- slowly but surely giving a chance for every task
to become the "leftmost task" and thus get on the CPU within a deterministic
amount of time.

Summing up, CFS works like this: it runs a task a bit, and when the task
schedules (or a scheduler tick happens) the task's CPU usage is "accounted
for": the (small) time it just spent using the physical CPU is added to
p->se.vruntime.  Once p->se.vruntime gets high enough so that another task
becomes the "leftmost task" of the time-ordered rbtree it maintains (plus a
small amount of "granularity" distance relative to the leftmost task so that we
do not over-schedule tasks and trash the cache), then the new leftmost task is
picked and the current task is preempted.



4.  SOME FEATURES OF CFS
========================

CFS uses nanosecond granularity accounting and does not rely on any jiffies or
other HZ detail.  Thus the CFS scheduler has no notion of "timeslices" in the
way the previous scheduler had, and has no heuristics whatsoever.  There is
only one central tunable (you have to switch on CONFIG_SCHED_DEBUG):

   /sys/kernel/debug/sched/base_slice_ns

which can be used to tune the scheduler from "desktop" (i.e., low latencies) to
"server" (i.e., good batching) workloads.  It defaults to a setting suitable
for desktop workloads.  SCHED_BATCH is handled by the CFS scheduler module too.

In case CONFIG_HZ results in base_slice_ns < TICK_NSEC, the value of
base_slice_ns will have little to no impact on the workloads.

Due to its design, the CFS scheduler is not prone to any of the "attacks" that
exist today against the heuristics of the stock scheduler: fiftyp.c, thud.c,
chew.c, ring-test.c, massive_intr.c all work fine and do not impact
interactivity and produce the expected behavior.

The CFS scheduler has a much stronger handling of nice levels and SCHED_BATCH
than the previous vanilla scheduler: both types of workloads are isolated much
more aggressively.

SMP load-balancing has been reworked/sanitized: the runqueue-walking
assumptions are gone from the load-balancing code now, and iterators of the
scheduling modules are used.  The balancing code got quite a bit simpler as a
result.



5. Scheduling policies
======================

CFS implements three scheduling policies:

  - SCHED_NORMAL (traditionally called SCHED_OTHER): The scheduling
    policy that is used for regular tasks.

  - SCHED_BATCH: Does not preempt nearly as often as regular tasks
    would, thereby allowing tasks to run longer and make better use of
    caches but at the cost of interactivity. This is well suited for
    batch jobs.

  - SCHED_IDLE: This is even weaker than nice 19, but its not a true
    idle timer scheduler in order to avoid to get into priority
    inversion problems which would deadlock the machine.

SCHED_FIFO/_RR are implemented in sched/rt.c and are as specified by
POSIX.

The command chrt from util-linux-ng 2.13.1.1 can set all of these except
SCHED_IDLE.



6.  SCHEDULING CLASSES
======================

The new CFS scheduler has been designed in such a way to introduce "Scheduling
Classes," an extensible hierarchy of scheduler modules.  These modules
encapsulate scheduling policy details and are handled by the scheduler core
without the core code assuming too much about them.

sched/fair.c implements the CFS scheduler described above.

sched/rt.c implements SCHED_FIFO and SCHED_RR semantics, in a simpler way than
the previous vanilla scheduler did.  It uses 100 runqueues (for all 100 RT
priority levels, instead of 140 in the previous scheduler) and it needs no
expired array.

Scheduling classes are implemented through the sched_class structure, which
contains hooks to functions that must be called whenever an interesting event
occurs.

This is the (partial) list of the hooks:

 - enqueue_task(...)

   Called when a task enters a runnable state.
   It puts the scheduling entity (task) into the red-black tree and
   increments the nr_running variable.

 - dequeue_task(...)

   When a task is no longer runnable, this function is called to keep the
   corresponding scheduling entity out of the red-black tree.  It decrements
   the nr_running variable.

 - yield_task(...)

   This function is basically just a dequeue followed by an enqueue, unless the
   compat_yield sysctl is turned on; in that case, it places the scheduling
   entity at the right-most end of the red-black tree.

 - wakeup_preempt(...)

   This function checks if a task that entered the runnable state should
   preempt the currently running task.

 - pick_next_task(...)

   This function chooses the most appropriate task eligible to run next.

 - set_next_task(...)

   This function is called when a task changes its scheduling class, changes
   its task group or is scheduled.

 - task_tick(...)

   This function is mostly called from time tick functions; it might lead to
   process switch.  This drives the running preemption.




7.  GROUP SCHEDULER EXTENSIONS TO CFS
=====================================

Normally, the scheduler operates on individual tasks and strives to provide
fair CPU time to each task.  Sometimes, it may be desirable to group tasks and
provide fair CPU time to each such task group.  For example, it may be
desirable to first provide fair CPU time to each user on the system and then to
each task belonging to a user.

CONFIG_CGROUP_SCHED strives to achieve exactly that.  It lets tasks to be
grouped and divides CPU time fairly among such groups.

CONFIG_RT_GROUP_SCHED permits to group real-time (i.e., SCHED_FIFO and
SCHED_RR) tasks.

CONFIG_FAIR_GROUP_SCHED permits to group CFS (i.e., SCHED_NORMAL and
SCHED_BATCH) tasks.

   These options need CONFIG_CGROUPS to be defined, and let the administrator
   create arbitrary groups of tasks, using the "cgroup" pseudo filesystem.  See
   Documentation/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/cgroups.rst for more information about this filesystem.

When CONFIG_FAIR_GROUP_SCHED is defined, a "cpu.shares" file is created for each
group created using the pseudo filesystem.  See example steps below to create
task groups and modify their CPU share using the "cgroups" pseudo filesystem::

	# mount -t tmpfs cgroup_root /sys/fs/cgroup
	# mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/cpu
	# mount -t cgroup -ocpu none /sys/fs/cgroup/cpu
	# cd /sys/fs/cgroup/cpu

	# mkdir multimedia	# create "multimedia" group of tasks
	# mkdir browser		# create "browser" group of tasks

	# #Configure the multimedia group to receive twice the CPU bandwidth
	# #that of browser group

	# echo 2048 > multimedia/cpu.shares
	# echo 1024 > browser/cpu.shares

	# firefox &	# Launch firefox and move it to "browser" group
	# echo <firefox_pid> > browser/tasks

	# #Launch gmplayer (or your favourite movie player)
	# echo <movie_player_pid> > multimedia/tasks
=================
Scheduler Domains
=================

Each CPU has a "base" scheduling domain (struct sched_domain). The domain
hierarchy is built from these base domains via the ->parent pointer. ->parent
MUST be NULL terminated, and domain structures should be per-CPU as they are
locklessly updated.

Each scheduling domain spans a number of CPUs (stored in the ->span field).
A domain's span MUST be a superset of it child's span (this restriction could
be relaxed if the need arises), and a base domain for CPU i MUST span at least
i. The top domain for each CPU will generally span all CPUs in the system
although strictly it doesn't have to, but this could lead to a case where some
CPUs will never be given tasks to run unless the CPUs allowed mask is
explicitly set. A sched domain's span means "balance process load among these
CPUs".

Each scheduling domain must have one or more CPU groups (struct sched_group)
which are organised as a circular one way linked list from the ->groups
pointer. The union of cpumasks of these groups MUST be the same as the
domain's span. The group pointed to by the ->groups pointer MUST contain the CPU
to which the domain belongs. Groups may be shared among CPUs as they contain
read only data after they have been set up. The intersection of cpumasks from
any two of these groups may be non empty. If this is the case the SD_OVERLAP
flag is set on the corresponding scheduling domain and its groups may not be
shared between CPUs.

Balancing within a sched domain occurs between groups. That is, each group
is treated as one entity. The load of a group is defined as the sum of the
load of each of its member CPUs, and only when the load of a group becomes
out of balance are tasks moved between groups.

In kernel/sched/core.c, sched_balance_trigger() is run periodically on each CPU
through sched_tick(). It raises a softirq after the next regularly scheduled
rebalancing event for the current runqueue has arrived. The actual load
balancing workhorse, sched_balance_softirq()->sched_balance_domains(), is then run
in softirq context (SCHED_SOFTIRQ).

The latter function takes two arguments: the runqueue of current CPU and whether
the CPU was idle at the time the sched_tick() happened and iterates over all
sched domains our CPU is on, starting from its base domain and going up the ->parent
chain. While doing that, it checks to see if the current domain has exhausted its
rebalance interval. If so, it runs sched_balance_rq() on that domain. It then checks
the parent sched_domain (if it exists), and the parent of the parent and so
forth.

Initially, sched_balance_rq() finds the busiest group in the current sched domain.
If it succeeds, it looks for the busiest runqueue of all the CPUs' runqueues in
that group. If it manages to find such a runqueue, it locks both our initial
CPU's runqueue and the newly found busiest one and starts moving tasks from it
to our runqueue. The exact number of tasks amounts to an imbalance previously
computed while iterating over this sched domain's groups.

Implementing sched domains
==========================

The "base" domain will "span" the first level of the hierarchy. In the case
of SMT, you'll span all siblings of the physical CPU, with each group being
a single virtual CPU.

In SMP, the parent of the base domain will span all physical CPUs in the
node. Each group being a single physical CPU. Then with NUMA, the parent
of the SMP domain will span the entire machine, with each group having the
cpumask of a node. Or, you could do multi-level NUMA or Opteron, for example,
might have just one domain covering its one NUMA level.

The implementor should read comments in include/linux/sched/sd_flags.h:
SD_* to get an idea of the specifics and what to tune for the SD flags
of a sched_domain.

Architectures may override the generic domain builder and the default SD flags
for a given topology level by creating a sched_domain_topology_level array and
calling set_sched_topology() with this array as the parameter.

The sched-domains debugging infrastructure can be enabled by enabling
CONFIG_SCHED_DEBUG and adding 'sched_verbose' to your cmdline. If you
forgot to tweak your cmdline, you can also flip the
/sys/kernel/debug/sched/verbose knob. This enables an error checking parse of
the sched domains which should catch most possible errors (described above). It
also prints out the domain structure in a visual format.
===============
EEVDF Scheduler
===============

The "Earliest Eligible Virtual Deadline First" (EEVDF) was first introduced
in a scientific publication in 1995 [1]. The Linux kernel began
transitioning to EEVDF in version 6.6 (as a new option in 2024), moving
away from the earlier Completely Fair Scheduler (CFS) in favor of a version
of EEVDF proposed by Peter Zijlstra in 2023 [2-4]. More information
regarding CFS can be found in
Documentation/scheduler/sched-design-CFS.rst.

Similarly to CFS, EEVDF aims to distribute CPU time equally among all
runnable tasks with the same priority. To do so, it assigns a virtual run
time to each task, creating a "lag" value that can be used to determine
whether a task has received its fair share of CPU time. In this way, a task
with a positive lag is owed CPU time, while a negative lag means the task
has exceeded its portion. EEVDF picks tasks with lag greater or equal to
zero and calculates a virtual deadline (VD) for each, selecting the task
with the earliest VD to execute next. It's important to note that this
allows latency-sensitive tasks with shorter time slices to be prioritized,
which helps with their responsiveness.

There are ongoing discussions on how to manage lag, especially for sleeping
tasks; but at the time of writing EEVDF uses a "decaying" mechanism based
on virtual run time (VRT). This prevents tasks from exploiting the system
by sleeping briefly to reset their negative lag: when a task sleeps, it
remains on the run queue but marked for "deferred dequeue," allowing its
lag to decay over VRT. Hence, long-sleeping tasks eventually have their lag
reset. Finally, tasks can preempt others if their VD is earlier, and tasks
can request specific time slices using the new sched_setattr() system call,
which further facilitates the job of latency-sensitive applications.

REFERENCES
==========

[1] https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=805acf7726282721504c8f00575d91ebfd750564

[2] https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/a79014e6-ea83-b316-1e12-2ae056bda6fa@linux.vnet.ibm.com/

[3] https://lwn.net/Articles/969062/

[4] https://lwn.net/Articles/925371/
=======================
Energy Aware Scheduling
=======================

1. Introduction
---------------

Energy Aware Scheduling (or EAS) gives the scheduler the ability to predict
the impact of its decisions on the energy consumed by CPUs. EAS relies on an
Energy Model (EM) of the CPUs to select an energy efficient CPU for each task,
with a minimal impact on throughput. This document aims at providing an
introduction on how EAS works, what are the main design decisions behind it, and
details what is needed to get it to run.

Before going any further, please note that at the time of writing::

   /!\ EAS does not support platforms with symmetric CPU topologies /!\

EAS operates only on heterogeneous CPU topologies (such as Arm big.LITTLE)
because this is where the potential for saving energy through scheduling is
the highest.

The actual EM used by EAS is _not_ maintained by the scheduler, but by a
dedicated framework. For details about this framework and what it provides,
please refer to its documentation (see Documentation/power/energy-model.rst).


2. Background and Terminology
-----------------------------

To make it clear from the start:
 - energy = [joule] (resource like a battery on powered devices)
 - power = energy/time = [joule/second] = [watt]

The goal of EAS is to minimize energy, while still getting the job done. That
is, we want to maximize::

	performance [inst/s]
	--------------------
	    power [W]

which is equivalent to minimizing::

	energy [J]
	-----------
	instruction

while still getting 'good' performance. It is essentially an alternative
optimization objective to the current performance-only objective for the
scheduler. This alternative considers two objectives: energy-efficiency and
performance.

The idea behind introducing an EM is to allow the scheduler to evaluate the
implications of its decisions rather than blindly applying energy-saving
techniques that may have positive effects only on some platforms. At the same
time, the EM must be as simple as possible to minimize the scheduler latency
impact.

In short, EAS changes the way CFS tasks are assigned to CPUs. When it is time
for the scheduler to decide where a task should run (during wake-up), the EM
is used to break the tie between several good CPU candidates and pick the one
that is predicted to yield the best energy consumption without harming the
system's throughput. The predictions made by EAS rely on specific elements of
knowledge about the platform's topology, which include the 'capacity' of CPUs,
and their respective energy costs.


3. Topology information
-----------------------

EAS (as well as the rest of the scheduler) uses the notion of 'capacity' to
differentiate CPUs with different computing throughput. The 'capacity' of a CPU
represents the amount of work it can absorb when running at its highest
frequency compared to the most capable CPU of the system. Capacity values are
normalized in a 1024 range, and are comparable with the utilization signals of
tasks and CPUs computed by the Per-Entity Load Tracking (PELT) mechanism. Thanks
to capacity and utilization values, EAS is able to estimate how big/busy a
task/CPU is, and to take this into consideration when evaluating performance vs
energy trade-offs. The capacity of CPUs is provided via arch-specific code
through the arch_scale_cpu_capacity() callback.

The rest of platform knowledge used by EAS is directly read from the Energy
Model (EM) framework. The EM of a platform is composed of a power cost table
per 'performance domain' in the system (see Documentation/power/energy-model.rst
for further details about performance domains).

The scheduler manages references to the EM objects in the topology code when the
scheduling domains are built, or re-built. For each root domain (rd), the
scheduler maintains a singly linked list of all performance domains intersecting
the current rd->span. Each node in the list contains a pointer to a struct
em_perf_domain as provided by the EM framework.

The lists are attached to the root domains in order to cope with exclusive
cpuset configurations. Since the boundaries of exclusive cpusets do not
necessarily match those of performance domains, the lists of different root
domains can contain duplicate elements.

Example 1.
    Let us consider a platform with 12 CPUs, split in 3 performance domains
    (pd0, pd4 and pd8), organized as follows::

	          CPUs:   0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
	          PDs:   |--pd0--|--pd4--|---pd8---|
	          RDs:   |----rd1----|-----rd2-----|

    Now, consider that userspace decided to split the system with two
    exclusive cpusets, hence creating two independent root domains, each
    containing 6 CPUs. The two root domains are denoted rd1 and rd2 in the
    above figure. Since pd4 intersects with both rd1 and rd2, it will be
    present in the linked list '->pd' attached to each of them:

       * rd1->pd: pd0 -> pd4
       * rd2->pd: pd4 -> pd8

    Please note that the scheduler will create two duplicate list nodes for
    pd4 (one for each list). However, both just hold a pointer to the same
    shared data structure of the EM framework.

Since the access to these lists can happen concurrently with hotplug and other
things, they are protected by RCU, like the rest of topology structures
manipulated by the scheduler.

EAS also maintains a static key (sched_energy_present) which is enabled when at
least one root domain meets all conditions for EAS to start. Those conditions
are summarized in Section 6.


4. Energy-Aware task placement
------------------------------

EAS overrides the CFS task wake-up balancing code. It uses the EM of the
platform and the PELT signals to choose an energy-efficient target CPU during
wake-up balance. When EAS is enabled, select_task_rq_fair() calls
find_energy_efficient_cpu() to do the placement decision. This function looks
for the CPU with the highest spare capacity (CPU capacity - CPU utilization) in
each performance domain since it is the one which will allow us to keep the
frequency the lowest. Then, the function checks if placing the task there could
save energy compared to leaving it on prev_cpu, i.e. the CPU where the task ran
in its previous activation.

find_energy_efficient_cpu() uses compute_energy() to estimate what will be the
energy consumed by the system if the waking task was migrated. compute_energy()
looks at the current utilization landscape of the CPUs and adjusts it to
'simulate' the task migration. The EM framework provides the em_pd_energy() API
which computes the expected energy consumption of each performance domain for
the given utilization landscape.

An example of energy-optimized task placement decision is detailed below.

Example 2.
    Let us consider a (fake) platform with 2 independent performance domains
    composed of two CPUs each. CPU0 and CPU1 are little CPUs; CPU2 and CPU3
    are big.

    The scheduler must decide where to place a task P whose util_avg = 200
    and prev_cpu = 0.

    The current utilization landscape of the CPUs is depicted on the graph
    below. CPUs 0-3 have a util_avg of 400, 100, 600 and 500 respectively
    Each performance domain has three Operating Performance Points (OPPs).
    The CPU capacity and power cost associated with each OPP is listed in
    the Energy Model table. The util_avg of P is shown on the figures
    below as 'PP'::

     CPU util.
      1024                 - - - - - - -              Energy Model
                                               +-----------+-------------+
                                               |  Little   |     Big     |
       768                 =============       +-----+-----+------+------+
                                               | Cap | Pwr | Cap  | Pwr  |
                                               +-----+-----+------+------+
       512  ===========    - ##- - - - -       | 170 | 50  | 512  | 400  |
                             ##     ##         | 341 | 150 | 768  | 800  |
       341  -PP - - - -      ##     ##         | 512 | 300 | 1024 | 1700 |
             PP              ##     ##         +-----+-----+------+------+
       170  -## - - - -      ##     ##
             ##     ##       ##     ##
           ------------    -------------
            CPU0   CPU1     CPU2   CPU3

      Current OPP: =====       Other OPP: - - -     util_avg (100 each): ##


    find_energy_efficient_cpu() will first look for the CPUs with the
    maximum spare capacity in the two performance domains. In this example,
    CPU1 and CPU3. Then it will estimate the energy of the system if P was
    placed on either of them, and check if that would save some energy
    compared to leaving P on CPU0. EAS assumes that OPPs follow utilization
    (which is coherent with the behaviour of the schedutil CPUFreq
    governor, see Section 6. for more details on this topic).

    **Case 1. P is migrated to CPU1**::

      1024                 - - - - - - -

                                            Energy calculation:
       768                 =============     * CPU0: 200 / 341 * 150 = 88
                                             * CPU1: 300 / 341 * 150 = 131
                                             * CPU2: 600 / 768 * 800 = 625
       512  - - - - - -    - ##- - - - -     * CPU3: 500 / 768 * 800 = 520
                             ##     ##          => total_energy = 1364
       341  ===========      ##     ##
                    PP       ##     ##
       170  -## - - PP-      ##     ##
             ##     ##       ##     ##
           ------------    -------------
            CPU0   CPU1     CPU2   CPU3


    **Case 2. P is migrated to CPU3**::

      1024                 - - - - - - -

                                            Energy calculation:
       768                 =============     * CPU0: 200 / 341 * 150 = 88
                                             * CPU1: 100 / 341 * 150 = 43
                                    PP       * CPU2: 600 / 768 * 800 = 625
       512  - - - - - -    - ##- - -PP -     * CPU3: 700 / 768 * 800 = 729
                             ##     ##          => total_energy = 1485
       341  ===========      ##     ##
                             ##     ##
       170  -## - - - -      ##     ##
             ##     ##       ##     ##
           ------------    -------------
            CPU0   CPU1     CPU2   CPU3


    **Case 3. P stays on prev_cpu / CPU 0**::

      1024                 - - - - - - -

                                            Energy calculation:
       768                 =============     * CPU0: 400 / 512 * 300 = 234
                                             * CPU1: 100 / 512 * 300 = 58
                                             * CPU2: 600 / 768 * 800 = 625
       512  ===========    - ##- - - - -     * CPU3: 500 / 768 * 800 = 520
                             ##     ##          => total_energy = 1437
       341  -PP - - - -      ##     ##
             PP              ##     ##
       170  -## - - - -      ##     ##
             ##     ##       ##     ##
           ------------    -------------
            CPU0   CPU1     CPU2   CPU3


    From these calculations, the Case 1 has the lowest total energy. So CPU 1
    is be the best candidate from an energy-efficiency standpoint.

Big CPUs are generally more power hungry than the little ones and are thus used
mainly when a task doesn't fit the littles. However, little CPUs aren't always
necessarily more energy-efficient than big CPUs. For some systems, the high OPPs
of the little CPUs can be less energy-efficient than the lowest OPPs of the
bigs, for example. So, if the little CPUs happen to have enough utilization at
a specific point in time, a small task waking up at that moment could be better
of executing on the big side in order to save energy, even though it would fit
on the little side.

And even in the case where all OPPs of the big CPUs are less energy-efficient
than those of the little, using the big CPUs for a small task might still, under
specific conditions, save energy. Indeed, placing a task on a little CPU can
result in raising the OPP of the entire performance domain, and that will
increase the cost of the tasks already running there. If the waking task is
placed on a big CPU, its own execution cost might be higher than if it was
running on a little, but it won't impact the other tasks of the little CPUs
which will keep running at a lower OPP. So, when considering the total energy
consumed by CPUs, the extra cost of running that one task on a big core can be
smaller than the cost of raising the OPP on the little CPUs for all the other
tasks.

The examples above would be nearly impossible to get right in a generic way, and
for all platforms, without knowing the cost of running at different OPPs on all
CPUs of the system. Thanks to its EM-based design, EAS should cope with them
correctly without too many troubles. However, in order to ensure a minimal
impact on throughput for high-utilization scenarios, EAS also implements another
mechanism called 'over-utilization'.


5. Over-utilization
-------------------

From a general standpoint, the use-cases where EAS can help the most are those
involving a light/medium CPU utilization. Whenever long CPU-bound tasks are
being run, they will require all of the available CPU capacity, and there isn't
much that can be done by the scheduler to save energy without severely harming
throughput. In order to avoid hurting performance with EAS, CPUs are flagged as
'over-utilized' as soon as they are used at more than 80% of their compute
capacity. As long as no CPUs are over-utilized in a root domain, load balancing
is disabled and EAS overridess the wake-up balancing code. EAS is likely to load
the most energy efficient CPUs of the system more than the others if that can be
done without harming throughput. So, the load-balancer is disabled to prevent
it from breaking the energy-efficient task placement found by EAS. It is safe to
do so when the system isn't overutilized since being below the 80% tipping point
implies that:

    a. there is some idle time on all CPUs, so the utilization signals used by
       EAS are likely to accurately represent the 'size' of the various tasks
       in the system;
    b. all tasks should already be provided with enough CPU capacity,
       regardless of their nice values;
    c. since there is spare capacity all tasks must be blocking/sleeping
       regularly and balancing at wake-up is sufficient.

As soon as one CPU goes above the 80% tipping point, at least one of the three
assumptions above becomes incorrect. In this scenario, the 'overutilized' flag
is raised for the entire root domain, EAS is disabled, and the load-balancer is
re-enabled. By doing so, the scheduler falls back onto load-based algorithms for
wake-up and load balance under CPU-bound conditions. This provides a better
respect of the nice values of tasks.

Since the notion of overutilization largely relies on detecting whether or not
there is some idle time in the system, the CPU capacity 'stolen' by higher
(than CFS) scheduling classes (as well as IRQ) must be taken into account. As
such, the detection of overutilization accounts for the capacity used not only
by CFS tasks, but also by the other scheduling classes and IRQ.


6. Dependencies and requirements for EAS
----------------------------------------

Energy Aware Scheduling depends on the CPUs of the system having specific
hardware properties and on other features of the kernel being enabled. This
section lists these dependencies and provides hints as to how they can be met.


6.1 - Asymmetric CPU topology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


As mentioned in the introduction, EAS is only supported on platforms with
asymmetric CPU topologies for now. This requirement is checked at run-time by
looking for the presence of the SD_ASYM_CPUCAPACITY_FULL flag when the scheduling
domains are built.

See Documentation/scheduler/sched-capacity.rst for requirements to be met for this
flag to be set in the sched_domain hierarchy.

Please note that EAS is not fundamentally incompatible with SMP, but no
significant savings on SMP platforms have been observed yet. This restriction
could be amended in the future if proven otherwise.


6.2 - Energy Model presence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

EAS uses the EM of a platform to estimate the impact of scheduling decisions on
energy. So, your platform must provide power cost tables to the EM framework in
order to make EAS start. To do so, please refer to documentation of the
independent EM framework in Documentation/power/energy-model.rst.

Please also note that the scheduling domains need to be re-built after the
EM has been registered in order to start EAS.

EAS uses the EM to make a forecasting decision on energy usage and thus it is
more focused on the difference when checking possible options for task
placement. For EAS it doesn't matter whether the EM power values are expressed
in milli-Watts or in an 'abstract scale'.


6.3 - Energy Model complexity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

EAS does not impose any complexity limit on the number of PDs/OPPs/CPUs but
restricts the number of CPUs to EM_MAX_NUM_CPUS to prevent overflows during
the energy estimation.


6.4 - Schedutil governor
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

EAS tries to predict at which OPP will the CPUs be running in the close future
in order to estimate their energy consumption. To do so, it is assumed that OPPs
of CPUs follow their utilization.

Although it is very difficult to provide hard guarantees regarding the accuracy
of this assumption in practice (because the hardware might not do what it is
told to do, for example), schedutil as opposed to other CPUFreq governors at
least _requests_ frequencies calculated using the utilization signals.
Consequently, the only sane governor to use together with EAS is schedutil,
because it is the only one providing some degree of consistency between
frequency requests and energy predictions.

Using EAS with any other governor than schedutil is not supported.


6.5 Scale-invariant utilization signals
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to make accurate prediction across CPUs and for all performance
states, EAS needs frequency-invariant and CPU-invariant PELT signals. These can
be obtained using the architecture-defined arch_scale{cpu,freq}_capacity()
callbacks.

Using EAS on a platform that doesn't implement these two callbacks is not
supported.


6.6 Multithreading (SMT)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

EAS in its current form is SMT unaware and is not able to leverage
multithreaded hardware to save energy. EAS considers threads as independent
CPUs, which can actually be counter-productive for both performance and energy.

EAS on SMT is not supported.
==========================
Extensible Scheduler Class
==========================

sched_ext is a scheduler class whose behavior can be defined by a set of BPF
programs - the BPF scheduler.

* sched_ext exports a full scheduling interface so that any scheduling
  algorithm can be implemented on top.

* The BPF scheduler can group CPUs however it sees fit and schedule them
  together, as tasks aren't tied to specific CPUs at the time of wakeup.

* The BPF scheduler can be turned on and off dynamically anytime.

* The system integrity is maintained no matter what the BPF scheduler does.
  The default scheduling behavior is restored anytime an error is detected,
  a runnable task stalls, or on invoking the SysRq key sequence
  :kbd:`SysRq-S`.

* When the BPF scheduler triggers an error, debug information is dumped to
  aid debugging. The debug dump is passed to and printed out by the
  scheduler binary. The debug dump can also be accessed through the
  `sched_ext_dump` tracepoint. The SysRq key sequence :kbd:`SysRq-D`
  triggers a debug dump. This doesn't terminate the BPF scheduler and can
  only be read through the tracepoint.

Switching to and from sched_ext
===============================

``CONFIG_SCHED_CLASS_EXT`` is the config option to enable sched_ext and
``tools/sched_ext`` contains the example schedulers. The following config
options should be enabled to use sched_ext:

.. code-block:: none

    CONFIG_BPF=y
    CONFIG_SCHED_CLASS_EXT=y
    CONFIG_BPF_SYSCALL=y
    CONFIG_BPF_JIT=y
    CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO_BTF=y
    CONFIG_BPF_JIT_ALWAYS_ON=y
    CONFIG_BPF_JIT_DEFAULT_ON=y
    CONFIG_PAHOLE_HAS_SPLIT_BTF=y
    CONFIG_PAHOLE_HAS_BTF_TAG=y

sched_ext is used only when the BPF scheduler is loaded and running.

If a task explicitly sets its scheduling policy to ``SCHED_EXT``, it will be
treated as ``SCHED_NORMAL`` and scheduled by CFS until the BPF scheduler is
loaded.

When the BPF scheduler is loaded and ``SCX_OPS_SWITCH_PARTIAL`` is not set
in ``ops->flags``, all ``SCHED_NORMAL``, ``SCHED_BATCH``, ``SCHED_IDLE``, and
``SCHED_EXT`` tasks are scheduled by sched_ext.

However, when the BPF scheduler is loaded and ``SCX_OPS_SWITCH_PARTIAL`` is
set in ``ops->flags``, only tasks with the ``SCHED_EXT`` policy are scheduled
by sched_ext, while tasks with ``SCHED_NORMAL``, ``SCHED_BATCH`` and
``SCHED_IDLE`` policies are scheduled by CFS.

Terminating the sched_ext scheduler program, triggering :kbd:`SysRq-S`, or
detection of any internal error including stalled runnable tasks aborts the
BPF scheduler and reverts all tasks back to CFS.

.. code-block:: none

    # make -j16 -C tools/sched_ext
    # tools/sched_ext/build/bin/scx_simple
    local=0 global=3
    local=5 global=24
    local=9 global=44
    local=13 global=56
    local=17 global=72
    ^CEXIT: BPF scheduler unregistered

The current status of the BPF scheduler can be determined as follows:

.. code-block:: none

    # cat /sys/kernel/sched_ext/state
    enabled
    # cat /sys/kernel/sched_ext/root/ops
    simple

You can check if any BPF scheduler has ever been loaded since boot by examining
this monotonically incrementing counter (a value of zero indicates that no BPF
scheduler has been loaded):

.. code-block:: none

    # cat /sys/kernel/sched_ext/enable_seq
    1

``tools/sched_ext/scx_show_state.py`` is a drgn script which shows more
detailed information:

.. code-block:: none

    # tools/sched_ext/scx_show_state.py
    ops           : simple
    enabled       : 1
    switching_all : 1
    switched_all  : 1
    enable_state  : enabled (2)
    bypass_depth  : 0
    nr_rejected   : 0
    enable_seq    : 1

If ``CONFIG_SCHED_DEBUG`` is set, whether a given task is on sched_ext can
be determined as follows:

.. code-block:: none

    # grep ext /proc/self/sched
    ext.enabled                                  :                    1

The Basics
==========

Userspace can implement an arbitrary BPF scheduler by loading a set of BPF
programs that implement ``struct sched_ext_ops``. The only mandatory field
is ``ops.name`` which must be a valid BPF object name. All operations are
optional. The following modified excerpt is from
``tools/sched_ext/scx_simple.bpf.c`` showing a minimal global FIFO scheduler.

.. code-block:: c

    /*
     * Decide which CPU a task should be migrated to before being
     * enqueued (either at wakeup, fork time, or exec time). If an
     * idle core is found by the default ops.select_cpu() implementation,
     * then dispatch the task directly to SCX_DSQ_LOCAL and skip the
     * ops.enqueue() callback.
     *
     * Note that this implementation has exactly the same behavior as the
     * default ops.select_cpu implementation. The behavior of the scheduler
     * would be exactly same if the implementation just didn't define the
     * simple_select_cpu() struct_ops prog.
     */
    s32 BPF_STRUCT_OPS(simple_select_cpu, struct task_struct *p,
                       s32 prev_cpu, u64 wake_flags)
    {
            s32 cpu;
            /* Need to initialize or the BPF verifier will reject the program */
            bool direct = false;

            cpu = scx_bpf_select_cpu_dfl(p, prev_cpu, wake_flags, &direct);

            if (direct)
                    scx_bpf_dispatch(p, SCX_DSQ_LOCAL, SCX_SLICE_DFL, 0);

            return cpu;
    }

    /*
     * Do a direct dispatch of a task to the global DSQ. This ops.enqueue()
     * callback will only be invoked if we failed to find a core to dispatch
     * to in ops.select_cpu() above.
     *
     * Note that this implementation has exactly the same behavior as the
     * default ops.enqueue implementation, which just dispatches the task
     * to SCX_DSQ_GLOBAL. The behavior of the scheduler would be exactly same
     * if the implementation just didn't define the simple_enqueue struct_ops
     * prog.
     */
    void BPF_STRUCT_OPS(simple_enqueue, struct task_struct *p, u64 enq_flags)
    {
            scx_bpf_dispatch(p, SCX_DSQ_GLOBAL, SCX_SLICE_DFL, enq_flags);
    }

    s32 BPF_STRUCT_OPS_SLEEPABLE(simple_init)
    {
            /*
             * By default, all SCHED_EXT, SCHED_OTHER, SCHED_IDLE, and
             * SCHED_BATCH tasks should use sched_ext.
             */
            return 0;
    }

    void BPF_STRUCT_OPS(simple_exit, struct scx_exit_info *ei)
    {
            exit_type = ei->type;
    }

    SEC(".struct_ops")
    struct sched_ext_ops simple_ops = {
            .select_cpu             = (void *)simple_select_cpu,
            .enqueue                = (void *)simple_enqueue,
            .init                   = (void *)simple_init,
            .exit                   = (void *)simple_exit,
            .name                   = "simple",
    };

Dispatch Queues
---------------

To match the impedance between the scheduler core and the BPF scheduler,
sched_ext uses DSQs (dispatch queues) which can operate as both a FIFO and a
priority queue. By default, there is one global FIFO (``SCX_DSQ_GLOBAL``),
and one local dsq per CPU (``SCX_DSQ_LOCAL``). The BPF scheduler can manage
an arbitrary number of dsq's using ``scx_bpf_create_dsq()`` and
``scx_bpf_destroy_dsq()``.

A CPU always executes a task from its local DSQ. A task is "dispatched" to a
DSQ. A non-local DSQ is "consumed" to transfer a task to the consuming CPU's
local DSQ.

When a CPU is looking for the next task to run, if the local DSQ is not
empty, the first task is picked. Otherwise, the CPU tries to consume the
global DSQ. If that doesn't yield a runnable task either, ``ops.dispatch()``
is invoked.

Scheduling Cycle
----------------

The following briefly shows how a waking task is scheduled and executed.

1. When a task is waking up, ``ops.select_cpu()`` is the first operation
   invoked. This serves two purposes. First, CPU selection optimization
   hint. Second, waking up the selected CPU if idle.

   The CPU selected by ``ops.select_cpu()`` is an optimization hint and not
   binding. The actual decision is made at the last step of scheduling.
   However, there is a small performance gain if the CPU
   ``ops.select_cpu()`` returns matches the CPU the task eventually runs on.

   A side-effect of selecting a CPU is waking it up from idle. While a BPF
   scheduler can wake up any cpu using the ``scx_bpf_kick_cpu()`` helper,
   using ``ops.select_cpu()`` judiciously can be simpler and more efficient.

   A task can be immediately dispatched to a DSQ from ``ops.select_cpu()`` by
   calling ``scx_bpf_dispatch()``. If the task is dispatched to
   ``SCX_DSQ_LOCAL`` from ``ops.select_cpu()``, it will be dispatched to the
   local DSQ of whichever CPU is returned from ``ops.select_cpu()``.
   Additionally, dispatching directly from ``ops.select_cpu()`` will cause the
   ``ops.enqueue()`` callback to be skipped.

   Note that the scheduler core will ignore an invalid CPU selection, for
   example, if it's outside the allowed cpumask of the task.

2. Once the target CPU is selected, ``ops.enqueue()`` is invoked (unless the
   task was dispatched directly from ``ops.select_cpu()``). ``ops.enqueue()``
   can make one of the following decisions:

   * Immediately dispatch the task to either the global or local DSQ by
     calling ``scx_bpf_dispatch()`` with ``SCX_DSQ_GLOBAL`` or
     ``SCX_DSQ_LOCAL``, respectively.

   * Immediately dispatch the task to a custom DSQ by calling
     ``scx_bpf_dispatch()`` with a DSQ ID which is smaller than 2^63.

   * Queue the task on the BPF side.

3. When a CPU is ready to schedule, it first looks at its local DSQ. If
   empty, it then looks at the global DSQ. If there still isn't a task to
   run, ``ops.dispatch()`` is invoked which can use the following two
   functions to populate the local DSQ.

   * ``scx_bpf_dispatch()`` dispatches a task to a DSQ. Any target DSQ can
     be used - ``SCX_DSQ_LOCAL``, ``SCX_DSQ_LOCAL_ON | cpu``,
     ``SCX_DSQ_GLOBAL`` or a custom DSQ. While ``scx_bpf_dispatch()``
     currently can't be called with BPF locks held, this is being worked on
     and will be supported. ``scx_bpf_dispatch()`` schedules dispatching
     rather than performing them immediately. There can be up to
     ``ops.dispatch_max_batch`` pending tasks.

   * ``scx_bpf_consume()`` tranfers a task from the specified non-local DSQ
     to the dispatching DSQ. This function cannot be called with any BPF
     locks held. ``scx_bpf_consume()`` flushes the pending dispatched tasks
     before trying to consume the specified DSQ.

4. After ``ops.dispatch()`` returns, if there are tasks in the local DSQ,
   the CPU runs the first one. If empty, the following steps are taken:

   * Try to consume the global DSQ. If successful, run the task.

   * If ``ops.dispatch()`` has dispatched any tasks, retry #3.

   * If the previous task is an SCX task and still runnable, keep executing
     it (see ``SCX_OPS_ENQ_LAST``).

   * Go idle.

Note that the BPF scheduler can always choose to dispatch tasks immediately
in ``ops.enqueue()`` as illustrated in the above simple example. If only the
built-in DSQs are used, there is no need to implement ``ops.dispatch()`` as
a task is never queued on the BPF scheduler and both the local and global
DSQs are consumed automatically.

``scx_bpf_dispatch()`` queues the task on the FIFO of the target DSQ. Use
``scx_bpf_dispatch_vtime()`` for the priority queue. Internal DSQs such as
``SCX_DSQ_LOCAL`` and ``SCX_DSQ_GLOBAL`` do not support priority-queue
dispatching, and must be dispatched to with ``scx_bpf_dispatch()``.  See the
function documentation and usage in ``tools/sched_ext/scx_simple.bpf.c`` for
more information.

Where to Look
=============

* ``include/linux/sched/ext.h`` defines the core data structures, ops table
  and constants.

* ``kernel/sched/ext.c`` contains sched_ext core implementation and helpers.
  The functions prefixed with ``scx_bpf_`` can be called from the BPF
  scheduler.

* ``tools/sched_ext/`` hosts example BPF scheduler implementations.

  * ``scx_simple[.bpf].c``: Minimal global FIFO scheduler example using a
    custom DSQ.

  * ``scx_qmap[.bpf].c``: A multi-level FIFO scheduler supporting five
    levels of priority implemented with ``BPF_MAP_TYPE_QUEUE``.

ABI Instability
===============

The APIs provided by sched_ext to BPF schedulers programs have no stability
guarantees. This includes the ops table callbacks and constants defined in
``include/linux/sched/ext.h``, as well as the ``scx_bpf_`` kfuncs defined in
``kernel/sched/ext.c``.

While we will attempt to provide a relatively stable API surface when
possible, they are subject to change without warning between kernel
versions.
=====================
Scheduler Nice Design
=====================

This document explains the thinking about the revamped and streamlined
nice-levels implementation in the new Linux scheduler.

Nice levels were always pretty weak under Linux and people continuously
pestered us to make nice +19 tasks use up much less CPU time.

Unfortunately that was not that easy to implement under the old
scheduler, (otherwise we'd have done it long ago) because nice level
support was historically coupled to timeslice length, and timeslice
units were driven by the HZ tick, so the smallest timeslice was 1/HZ.

In the O(1) scheduler (in 2003) we changed negative nice levels to be
much stronger than they were before in 2.4 (and people were happy about
that change), and we also intentionally calibrated the linear timeslice
rule so that nice +19 level would be _exactly_ 1 jiffy. To better
understand it, the timeslice graph went like this (cheesy ASCII art
alert!)::


                   A
             \     | [timeslice length]
              \    |
               \   |
                \  |
                 \ |
                  \|___100msecs
                   |^ . _
                   |      ^ . _
                   |            ^ . _
 -*----------------------------------*-----> [nice level]
 -20               |                +19
                   |
                   |

So that if someone wanted to really renice tasks, +19 would give a much
bigger hit than the normal linear rule would do. (The solution of
changing the ABI to extend priorities was discarded early on.)

This approach worked to some degree for some time, but later on with
HZ=1000 it caused 1 jiffy to be 1 msec, which meant 0.1% CPU usage which
we felt to be a bit excessive. Excessive _not_ because it's too small of
a CPU utilization, but because it causes too frequent (once per
millisec) rescheduling. (and would thus trash the cache, etc. Remember,
this was long ago when hardware was weaker and caches were smaller, and
people were running number crunching apps at nice +19.)

So for HZ=1000 we changed nice +19 to 5msecs, because that felt like the
right minimal granularity - and this translates to 5% CPU utilization.
But the fundamental HZ-sensitive property for nice+19 still remained,
and we never got a single complaint about nice +19 being too _weak_ in
terms of CPU utilization, we only got complaints about it (still) being
too _strong_ :-)

To sum it up: we always wanted to make nice levels more consistent, but
within the constraints of HZ and jiffies and their nasty design level
coupling to timeslices and granularity it was not really viable.

The second (less frequent but still periodically occurring) complaint
about Linux's nice level support was its asymmetry around the origin
(which you can see demonstrated in the picture above), or more
accurately: the fact that nice level behavior depended on the _absolute_
nice level as well, while the nice API itself is fundamentally
"relative":

   int nice(int inc);

   asmlinkage long sys_nice(int increment)

(the first one is the glibc API, the second one is the syscall API.)
Note that the 'inc' is relative to the current nice level. Tools like
bash's "nice" command mirror this relative API.

With the old scheduler, if you for example started a niced task with +1
and another task with +2, the CPU split between the two tasks would
depend on the nice level of the parent shell - if it was at nice -10 the
CPU split was different than if it was at +5 or +10.

A third complaint against Linux's nice level support was that negative
nice levels were not 'punchy enough', so lots of people had to resort to
run audio (and other multimedia) apps under RT priorities such as
SCHED_FIFO. But this caused other problems: SCHED_FIFO is not starvation
proof, and a buggy SCHED_FIFO app can also lock up the system for good.

The new scheduler in v2.6.23 addresses all three types of complaints:

To address the first complaint (of nice levels being not "punchy"
enough), the scheduler was decoupled from 'time slice' and HZ concepts
(and granularity was made a separate concept from nice levels) and thus
it was possible to implement better and more consistent nice +19
support: with the new scheduler nice +19 tasks get a HZ-independent
1.5%, instead of the variable 3%-5%-9% range they got in the old
scheduler.

To address the second complaint (of nice levels not being consistent),
the new scheduler makes nice(1) have the same CPU utilization effect on
tasks, regardless of their absolute nice levels. So on the new
scheduler, running a nice +10 and a nice 11 task has the same CPU
utilization "split" between them as running a nice -5 and a nice -4
task. (one will get 55% of the CPU, the other 45%.) That is why nice
levels were changed to be "multiplicative" (or exponential) - that way
it does not matter which nice level you start out from, the 'relative
result' will always be the same.

The third complaint (of negative nice levels not being "punchy" enough
and forcing audio apps to run under the more dangerous SCHED_FIFO
scheduling policy) is addressed by the new scheduler almost
automatically: stronger negative nice levels are an automatic
side-effect of the recalibrated dynamic range of nice levels.
==========================
Real-Time group scheduling
==========================

.. CONTENTS

   0. WARNING
   1. Overview
     1.1 The problem
     1.2 The solution
   2. The interface
     2.1 System-wide settings
     2.2 Default behaviour
     2.3 Basis for grouping tasks
   3. Future plans


0. WARNING
==========

 Fiddling with these settings can result in an unstable system, the knobs are
 root only and assumes root knows what he is doing.

Most notable:

 * very small values in sched_rt_period_us can result in an unstable
   system when the period is smaller than either the available hrtimer
   resolution, or the time it takes to handle the budget refresh itself.

 * very small values in sched_rt_runtime_us can result in an unstable
   system when the runtime is so small the system has difficulty making
   forward progress (NOTE: the migration thread and kstopmachine both
   are real-time processes).

1. Overview
===========


1.1 The problem
---------------

Real-time scheduling is all about determinism, a group has to be able to rely on
the amount of bandwidth (eg. CPU time) being constant. In order to schedule
multiple groups of real-time tasks, each group must be assigned a fixed portion
of the CPU time available.  Without a minimum guarantee a real-time group can
obviously fall short. A fuzzy upper limit is of no use since it cannot be
relied upon. Which leaves us with just the single fixed portion.

1.2 The solution
----------------

CPU time is divided by means of specifying how much time can be spent running
in a given period. We allocate this "run time" for each real-time group which
the other real-time groups will not be permitted to use.

Any time not allocated to a real-time group will be used to run normal priority
tasks (SCHED_OTHER). Any allocated run time not used will also be picked up by
SCHED_OTHER.

Let's consider an example: a frame fixed real-time renderer must deliver 25
frames a second, which yields a period of 0.04s per frame. Now say it will also
have to play some music and respond to input, leaving it with around 80% CPU
time dedicated for the graphics. We can then give this group a run time of 0.8
* 0.04s = 0.032s.

This way the graphics group will have a 0.04s period with a 0.032s run time
limit. Now if the audio thread needs to refill the DMA buffer every 0.005s, but
needs only about 3% CPU time to do so, it can do with a 0.03 * 0.005s =
0.00015s. So this group can be scheduled with a period of 0.005s and a run time
of 0.00015s.

The remaining CPU time will be used for user input and other tasks. Because
real-time tasks have explicitly allocated the CPU time they need to perform
their tasks, buffer underruns in the graphics or audio can be eliminated.

NOTE: the above example is not fully implemented yet. We still
lack an EDF scheduler to make non-uniform periods usable.


2. The Interface
================


2.1 System wide settings
------------------------

The system wide settings are configured under the /proc virtual file system:

/proc/sys/kernel/sched_rt_period_us:
  The scheduling period that is equivalent to 100% CPU bandwidth.

/proc/sys/kernel/sched_rt_runtime_us:
  A global limit on how much time real-time scheduling may use. This is always
  less or equal to the period_us, as it denotes the time allocated from the
  period_us for the real-time tasks. Even without CONFIG_RT_GROUP_SCHED enabled,
  this will limit time reserved to real-time processes. With
  CONFIG_RT_GROUP_SCHED=y it signifies the total bandwidth available to all
  real-time groups.

  * Time is specified in us because the interface is s32. This gives an
    operating range from 1us to about 35 minutes.
  * sched_rt_period_us takes values from 1 to INT_MAX.
  * sched_rt_runtime_us takes values from -1 to sched_rt_period_us.
  * A run time of -1 specifies runtime == period, ie. no limit.


2.2 Default behaviour
---------------------

The default values for sched_rt_period_us (1000000 or 1s) and
sched_rt_runtime_us (950000 or 0.95s).  This gives 0.05s to be used by
SCHED_OTHER (non-RT tasks). These defaults were chosen so that a run-away
real-time tasks will not lock up the machine but leave a little time to recover
it.  By setting runtime to -1 you'd get the old behaviour back.

By default all bandwidth is assigned to the root group and new groups get the
period from /proc/sys/kernel/sched_rt_period_us and a run time of 0. If you
want to assign bandwidth to another group, reduce the root group's bandwidth
and assign some or all of the difference to another group.

Real-time group scheduling means you have to assign a portion of total CPU
bandwidth to the group before it will accept real-time tasks. Therefore you will
not be able to run real-time tasks as any user other than root until you have
done that, even if the user has the rights to run processes with real-time
priority!


2.3 Basis for grouping tasks
----------------------------

Enabling CONFIG_RT_GROUP_SCHED lets you explicitly allocate real
CPU bandwidth to task groups.

This uses the cgroup virtual file system and "<cgroup>/cpu.rt_runtime_us"
to control the CPU time reserved for each control group.

For more information on working with control groups, you should read
Documentation/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/cgroups.rst as well.

Group settings are checked against the following limits in order to keep the
configuration schedulable:

   \Sum_{i} runtime_{i} / global_period <= global_runtime / global_period

For now, this can be simplified to just the following (but see Future plans):

   \Sum_{i} runtime_{i} <= global_runtime


3. Future plans
===============

There is work in progress to make the scheduling period for each group
("<cgroup>/cpu.rt_period_us") configurable as well.

The constraint on the period is that a subgroup must have a smaller or
equal period to its parent. But realistically its not very useful _yet_
as its prone to starvation without deadline scheduling.

Consider two sibling groups A and B; both have 50% bandwidth, but A's
period is twice the length of B's.

* group A: period=100000us, runtime=50000us

	- this runs for 0.05s once every 0.1s

* group B: period= 50000us, runtime=25000us

	- this runs for 0.025s twice every 0.1s (or once every 0.05 sec).

This means that currently a while (1) loop in A will run for the full period of
B and can starve B's tasks (assuming they are of lower priority) for a whole
period.

The next project will be SCHED_EDF (Earliest Deadline First scheduling) to bring
full deadline scheduling to the linux kernel. Deadline scheduling the above
groups and treating end of the period as a deadline will ensure that they both
get their allocated time.

Implementing SCHED_EDF might take a while to complete. Priority Inheritance is
the biggest challenge as the current linux PI infrastructure is geared towards
the limited static priority levels 0-99. With deadline scheduling you need to
do deadline inheritance (since priority is inversely proportional to the
deadline delta (deadline - now)).

This means the whole PI machinery will have to be reworked - and that is one of
the most complex pieces of code we have.
====================
Scheduler Statistics
====================

Version 16 of schedstats changed the order of definitions within
'enum cpu_idle_type', which changed the order of [CPU_MAX_IDLE_TYPES]
columns in show_schedstat(). In particular the position of CPU_IDLE
and __CPU_NOT_IDLE changed places. The size of the array is unchanged.

Version 15 of schedstats dropped counters for some sched_yield:
yld_exp_empty, yld_act_empty and yld_both_empty. Otherwise, it is
identical to version 14.

Version 14 of schedstats includes support for sched_domains, which hit the
mainline kernel in 2.6.20 although it is identical to the stats from version
12 which was in the kernel from 2.6.13-2.6.19 (version 13 never saw a kernel
release).  Some counters make more sense to be per-runqueue; other to be
per-domain.  Note that domains (and their associated information) will only
be pertinent and available on machines utilizing CONFIG_SMP.

In version 14 of schedstat, there is at least one level of domain
statistics for each cpu listed, and there may well be more than one
domain.  Domains have no particular names in this implementation, but
the highest numbered one typically arbitrates balancing across all the
cpus on the machine, while domain0 is the most tightly focused domain,
sometimes balancing only between pairs of cpus.  At this time, there
are no architectures which need more than three domain levels. The first
field in the domain stats is a bit map indicating which cpus are affected
by that domain.

These fields are counters, and only increment.  Programs which make use
of these will need to start with a baseline observation and then calculate
the change in the counters at each subsequent observation.  A perl script
which does this for many of the fields is available at

    http://eaglet.pdxhosts.com/rick/linux/schedstat/

Note that any such script will necessarily be version-specific, as the main
reason to change versions is changes in the output format.  For those wishing
to write their own scripts, the fields are described here.

CPU statistics
--------------
cpu<N> 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

First field is a sched_yield() statistic:

     1) # of times sched_yield() was called

Next three are schedule() statistics:

     2) This field is a legacy array expiration count field used in the O(1)
	scheduler. We kept it for ABI compatibility, but it is always set to zero.
     3) # of times schedule() was called
     4) # of times schedule() left the processor idle

Next two are try_to_wake_up() statistics:

     5) # of times try_to_wake_up() was called
     6) # of times try_to_wake_up() was called to wake up the local cpu

Next three are statistics describing scheduling latency:

     7) sum of all time spent running by tasks on this processor (in nanoseconds)
     8) sum of all time spent waiting to run by tasks on this processor (in
        nanoseconds)
     9) # of timeslices run on this cpu


Domain statistics
-----------------
One of these is produced per domain for each cpu described. (Note that if
CONFIG_SMP is not defined, *no* domains are utilized and these lines
will not appear in the output.)

domain<N> <cpumask> 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36

The first field is a bit mask indicating what cpus this domain operates over.

The next 24 are a variety of sched_balance_rq() statistics in grouped into types
of idleness (idle, busy, and newly idle):

    1)  # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() was called when the
        cpu was idle
    2)  # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() checked but found
        the load did not require balancing when the cpu was idle
    3)  # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() tried to move one or
        more tasks and failed, when the cpu was idle
    4)  sum of imbalances discovered (if any) with each call to
        sched_balance_rq() in this domain when the cpu was idle
    5)  # of times in this domain pull_task() was called when the cpu
        was idle
    6)  # of times in this domain pull_task() was called even though
        the target task was cache-hot when idle
    7)  # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() was called but did
        not find a busier queue while the cpu was idle
    8)  # of times in this domain a busier queue was found while the
        cpu was idle but no busier group was found
    9)  # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() was called when the
        cpu was busy
    10) # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() checked but found the
        load did not require balancing when busy
    11) # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() tried to move one or
        more tasks and failed, when the cpu was busy
    12) sum of imbalances discovered (if any) with each call to
        sched_balance_rq() in this domain when the cpu was busy
    13) # of times in this domain pull_task() was called when busy
    14) # of times in this domain pull_task() was called even though the
        target task was cache-hot when busy
    15) # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() was called but did not
        find a busier queue while the cpu was busy
    16) # of times in this domain a busier queue was found while the cpu
        was busy but no busier group was found

    17) # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() was called when the
        cpu was just becoming idle
    18) # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() checked but found the
        load did not require balancing when the cpu was just becoming idle
    19) # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() tried to move one or more
        tasks and failed, when the cpu was just becoming idle
    20) sum of imbalances discovered (if any) with each call to
        sched_balance_rq() in this domain when the cpu was just becoming idle
    21) # of times in this domain pull_task() was called when newly idle
    22) # of times in this domain pull_task() was called even though the
        target task was cache-hot when just becoming idle
    23) # of times in this domain sched_balance_rq() was called but did not
        find a busier queue while the cpu was just becoming idle
    24) # of times in this domain a busier queue was found while the cpu
        was just becoming idle but no busier group was found

   Next three are active_load_balance() statistics:

    25) # of times active_load_balance() was called
    26) # of times active_load_balance() tried to move a task and failed
    27) # of times active_load_balance() successfully moved a task

   Next three are sched_balance_exec() statistics:

    28) sbe_cnt is not used
    29) sbe_balanced is not used
    30) sbe_pushed is not used

   Next three are sched_balance_fork() statistics:

    31) sbf_cnt is not used
    32) sbf_balanced is not used
    33) sbf_pushed is not used

   Next three are try_to_wake_up() statistics:

    34) # of times in this domain try_to_wake_up() awoke a task that
        last ran on a different cpu in this domain
    35) # of times in this domain try_to_wake_up() moved a task to the
        waking cpu because it was cache-cold on its own cpu anyway
    36) # of times in this domain try_to_wake_up() started passive balancing

/proc/<pid>/schedstat
---------------------
schedstats also adds a new /proc/<pid>/schedstat file to include some of
the same information on a per-process level.  There are three fields in
this file correlating for that process to:

     1) time spent on the cpu (in nanoseconds)
     2) time spent waiting on a runqueue (in nanoseconds)
     3) # of timeslices run on this cpu

A program could be easily written to make use of these extra fields to
report on how well a particular process or set of processes is faring
under the scheduler's policies.  A simple version of such a program is
available at

    http://eaglet.pdxhosts.com/rick/linux/schedstat/v12/latency.c
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

====================
Utilization Clamping
====================

1. Introduction
===============

Utilization clamping, also known as util clamp or uclamp, is a scheduler
feature that allows user space to help in managing the performance requirement
of tasks. It was introduced in v5.3 release. The CGroup support was merged in
v5.4.

Uclamp is a hinting mechanism that allows the scheduler to understand the
performance requirements and restrictions of the tasks, thus it helps the
scheduler to make a better decision. And when schedutil cpufreq governor is
used, util clamp will influence the CPU frequency selection as well.

Since the scheduler and schedutil are both driven by PELT (util_avg) signals,
util clamp acts on that to achieve its goal by clamping the signal to a certain
point; hence the name. That is, by clamping utilization we are making the
system run at a certain performance point.

The right way to view util clamp is as a mechanism to make request or hint on
performance constraints. It consists of two tunables:

        * UCLAMP_MIN, which sets the lower bound.
        * UCLAMP_MAX, which sets the upper bound.

These two bounds will ensure a task will operate within this performance range
of the system. UCLAMP_MIN implies boosting a task, while UCLAMP_MAX implies
capping a task.

One can tell the system (scheduler) that some tasks require a minimum
performance point to operate at to deliver the desired user experience. Or one
can tell the system that some tasks should be restricted from consuming too
much resources and should not go above a specific performance point. Viewing
the uclamp values as performance points rather than utilization is a better
abstraction from user space point of view.

As an example, a game can use util clamp to form a feedback loop with its
perceived Frames Per Second (FPS). It can dynamically increase the minimum
performance point required by its display pipeline to ensure no frame is
dropped. It can also dynamically 'prime' up these tasks if it knows in the
coming few hundred milliseconds a computationally intensive scene is about to
happen.

On mobile hardware where the capability of the devices varies a lot, this
dynamic feedback loop offers a great flexibility to ensure best user experience
given the capabilities of any system.

Of course a static configuration is possible too. The exact usage will depend
on the system, application and the desired outcome.

Another example is in Android where tasks are classified as background,
foreground, top-app, etc. Util clamp can be used to constrain how much
resources background tasks are consuming by capping the performance point they
can run at. This constraint helps reserve resources for important tasks, like
the ones belonging to the currently active app (top-app group). Beside this
helps in limiting how much power they consume. This can be more obvious in
heterogeneous systems (e.g. Arm big.LITTLE); the constraint will help bias the
background tasks to stay on the little cores which will ensure that:

        1. The big cores are free to run top-app tasks immediately. top-app
           tasks are the tasks the user is currently interacting with, hence
           the most important tasks in the system.
        2. They don't run on a power hungry core and drain battery even if they
           are CPU intensive tasks.

.. note::
  **little cores**:
    CPUs with capacity < 1024

  **big cores**:
    CPUs with capacity = 1024

By making these uclamp performance requests, or rather hints, user space can
ensure system resources are used optimally to deliver the best possible user
experience.

Another use case is to help with **overcoming the ramp up latency inherit in
how scheduler utilization signal is calculated**.

On the other hand, a busy task for instance that requires to run at maximum
performance point will suffer a delay of ~200ms (PELT HALFIFE = 32ms) for the
scheduler to realize that. This is known to affect workloads like gaming on
mobile devices where frames will drop due to slow response time to select the
higher frequency required for the tasks to finish their work in time. Setting
UCLAMP_MIN=1024 will ensure such tasks will always see the highest performance
level when they start running.

The overall visible effect goes beyond better perceived user
experience/performance and stretches to help achieve a better overall
performance/watt if used effectively.

User space can form a feedback loop with the thermal subsystem too to ensure
the device doesn't heat up to the point where it will throttle.

Both SCHED_NORMAL/OTHER and SCHED_FIFO/RR honour uclamp requests/hints.

In the SCHED_FIFO/RR case, uclamp gives the option to run RT tasks at any
performance point rather than being tied to MAX frequency all the time. Which
can be useful on general purpose systems that run on battery powered devices.

Note that by design RT tasks don't have per-task PELT signal and must always
run at a constant frequency to combat undeterministic DVFS rampup delays.

Note that using schedutil always implies a single delay to modify the frequency
when an RT task wakes up. This cost is unchanged by using uclamp. Uclamp only
helps picking what frequency to request instead of schedutil always requesting
MAX for all RT tasks.

See :ref:`section 3.4 <uclamp-default-values>` for default values and
:ref:`3.4.1 <sched-util-clamp-min-rt-default>` on how to change RT tasks
default value.

2. Design
=========

Util clamp is a property of every task in the system. It sets the boundaries of
its utilization signal; acting as a bias mechanism that influences certain
decisions within the scheduler.

The actual utilization signal of a task is never clamped in reality. If you
inspect PELT signals at any point of time you should continue to see them as
they are intact. Clamping happens only when needed, e.g: when a task wakes up
and the scheduler needs to select a suitable CPU for it to run on.

Since the goal of util clamp is to allow requesting a minimum and maximum
performance point for a task to run on, it must be able to influence the
frequency selection as well as task placement to be most effective. Both of
which have implications on the utilization value at CPU runqueue (rq for short)
level, which brings us to the main design challenge.

When a task wakes up on an rq, the utilization signal of the rq will be
affected by the uclamp settings of all the tasks enqueued on it. For example if
a task requests to run at UTIL_MIN = 512, then the util signal of the rq needs
to respect to this request as well as all other requests from all of the
enqueued tasks.

To be able to aggregate the util clamp value of all the tasks attached to the
rq, uclamp must do some housekeeping at every enqueue/dequeue, which is the
scheduler hot path. Hence care must be taken since any slow down will have
significant impact on a lot of use cases and could hinder its usability in
practice.

The way this is handled is by dividing the utilization range into buckets
(struct uclamp_bucket) which allows us to reduce the search space from every
task on the rq to only a subset of tasks on the top-most bucket.

When a task is enqueued, the counter in the matching bucket is incremented,
and on dequeue it is decremented. This makes keeping track of the effective
uclamp value at rq level a lot easier.

As tasks are enqueued and dequeued, we keep track of the current effective
uclamp value of the rq. See :ref:`section 2.1 <uclamp-buckets>` for details on
how this works.

Later at any path that wants to identify the effective uclamp value of the rq,
it will simply need to read this effective uclamp value of the rq at that exact
moment of time it needs to take a decision.

For task placement case, only Energy Aware and Capacity Aware Scheduling
(EAS/CAS) make use of uclamp for now, which implies that it is applied on
heterogeneous systems only.
When a task wakes up, the scheduler will look at the current effective uclamp
value of every rq and compare it with the potential new value if the task were
to be enqueued there. Favoring the rq that will end up with the most energy
efficient combination.

Similarly in schedutil, when it needs to make a frequency update it will look
at the current effective uclamp value of the rq which is influenced by the set
of tasks currently enqueued there and select the appropriate frequency that
will satisfy constraints from requests.

Other paths like setting overutilization state (which effectively disables EAS)
make use of uclamp as well. Such cases are considered necessary housekeeping to
allow the 2 main use cases above and will not be covered in detail here as they
could change with implementation details.

.. _uclamp-buckets:

2.1. Buckets
------------

::

                           [struct rq]

  (bottom)                                                    (top)

    0                                                          1024
    |                                                           |
    +-----------+-----------+-----------+----   ----+-----------+
    |  Bucket 0 |  Bucket 1 |  Bucket 2 |    ...    |  Bucket N |
    +-----------+-----------+-----------+----   ----+-----------+
       :           :                                   :
       +- p0       +- p3                               +- p4
       :                                               :
       +- p1                                           +- p5
       :
       +- p2


.. note::
  The diagram above is an illustration rather than a true depiction of the
  internal data structure.

To reduce the search space when trying to decide the effective uclamp value of
an rq as tasks are enqueued/dequeued, the whole utilization range is divided
into N buckets where N is configured at compile time by setting
CONFIG_UCLAMP_BUCKETS_COUNT. By default it is set to 5.

The rq has a bucket for each uclamp_id tunables: [UCLAMP_MIN, UCLAMP_MAX].

The range of each bucket is 1024/N. For example, for the default value of
5 there will be 5 buckets, each of which will cover the following range:

::

        DELTA = round_closest(1024/5) = 204.8 = 205

        Bucket 0: [0:204]
        Bucket 1: [205:409]
        Bucket 2: [410:614]
        Bucket 3: [615:819]
        Bucket 4: [820:1024]

When a task p with following tunable parameters

::

        p->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = 300
        p->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 1024

is enqueued into the rq, bucket 1 will be incremented for UCLAMP_MIN and bucket
4 will be incremented for UCLAMP_MAX to reflect the fact the rq has a task in
this range.

The rq then keeps track of its current effective uclamp value for each
uclamp_id.

When a task p is enqueued, the rq value changes to:

::

        // update bucket logic goes here
        rq->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = max(rq->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN], p->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN])
        // repeat for UCLAMP_MAX

Similarly, when p is dequeued the rq value changes to:

::

        // update bucket logic goes here
        rq->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = search_top_bucket_for_highest_value()
        // repeat for UCLAMP_MAX

When all buckets are empty, the rq uclamp values are reset to system defaults.
See :ref:`section 3.4 <uclamp-default-values>` for details on default values.


2.2. Max aggregation
--------------------

Util clamp is tuned to honour the request for the task that requires the
highest performance point.

When multiple tasks are attached to the same rq, then util clamp must make sure
the task that needs the highest performance point gets it even if there's
another task that doesn't need it or is disallowed from reaching this point.

For example, if there are multiple tasks attached to an rq with the following
values:

::

        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = 300
        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 900

        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = 500
        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 500

then assuming both p0 and p1 are enqueued to the same rq, both UCLAMP_MIN
and UCLAMP_MAX become:

::

        rq->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = max(300, 500) = 500
        rq->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = max(900, 500) = 900

As we shall see in :ref:`section 5.1 <uclamp-capping-fail>`, this max
aggregation is the cause of one of limitations when using util clamp, in
particular for UCLAMP_MAX hint when user space would like to save power.

2.3. Hierarchical aggregation
-----------------------------

As stated earlier, util clamp is a property of every task in the system. But
the actual applied (effective) value can be influenced by more than just the
request made by the task or another actor on its behalf (middleware library).

The effective util clamp value of any task is restricted as follows:

  1. By the uclamp settings defined by the cgroup CPU controller it is attached
     to, if any.
  2. The restricted value in (1) is then further restricted by the system wide
     uclamp settings.

:ref:`Section 3 <uclamp-interfaces>` discusses the interfaces and will expand
further on that.

For now suffice to say that if a task makes a request, its actual effective
value will have to adhere to some restrictions imposed by cgroup and system
wide settings.

The system will still accept the request even if effectively will be beyond the
constraints, but as soon as the task moves to a different cgroup or a sysadmin
modifies the system settings, the request will be satisfied only if it is
within new constraints.

In other words, this aggregation will not cause an error when a task changes
its uclamp values, but rather the system may not be able to satisfy requests
based on those factors.

2.4. Range
----------

Uclamp performance request has the range of 0 to 1024 inclusive.

For cgroup interface percentage is used (that is 0 to 100 inclusive).
Just like other cgroup interfaces, you can use 'max' instead of 100.

.. _uclamp-interfaces:

3. Interfaces
=============

3.1. Per task interface
-----------------------

sched_setattr() syscall was extended to accept two new fields:

* sched_util_min: requests the minimum performance point the system should run
  at when this task is running. Or lower performance bound.
* sched_util_max: requests the maximum performance point the system should run
  at when this task is running. Or upper performance bound.

For example, the following scenario have 40% to 80% utilization constraints:

::

        attr->sched_util_min = 40% * 1024;
        attr->sched_util_max = 80% * 1024;

When task @p is running, **the scheduler should try its best to ensure it
starts at 40% performance level**. If the task runs for a long enough time so
that its actual utilization goes above 80%, the utilization, or performance
level, will be capped.

The special value -1 is used to reset the uclamp settings to the system
default.

Note that resetting the uclamp value to system default using -1 is not the same
as manually setting uclamp value to system default. This distinction is
important because as we shall see in system interfaces, the default value for
RT could be changed. SCHED_NORMAL/OTHER might gain similar knobs too in the
future.

3.2. cgroup interface
---------------------

There are two uclamp related values in the CPU cgroup controller:

* cpu.uclamp.min
* cpu.uclamp.max

When a task is attached to a CPU controller, its uclamp values will be impacted
as follows:

* cpu.uclamp.min is a protection as described in :ref:`section 3-3 of cgroup
  v2 documentation <cgroupv2-protections-distributor>`.

  If a task uclamp_min value is lower than cpu.uclamp.min, then the task will
  inherit the cgroup cpu.uclamp.min value.

  In a cgroup hierarchy, effective cpu.uclamp.min is the max of (child,
  parent).

* cpu.uclamp.max is a limit as described in :ref:`section 3-2 of cgroup v2
  documentation <cgroupv2-limits-distributor>`.

  If a task uclamp_max value is higher than cpu.uclamp.max, then the task will
  inherit the cgroup cpu.uclamp.max value.

  In a cgroup hierarchy, effective cpu.uclamp.max is the min of (child,
  parent).

For example, given following parameters:

::

        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = // system default;
        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = // system default;

        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = 40% * 1024;
        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 50% * 1024;

        cgroup0->cpu.uclamp.min = 20% * 1024;
        cgroup0->cpu.uclamp.max = 60% * 1024;

        cgroup1->cpu.uclamp.min = 60% * 1024;
        cgroup1->cpu.uclamp.max = 100% * 1024;

when p0 and p1 are attached to cgroup0, the values become:

::

        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = cgroup0->cpu.uclamp.min = 20% * 1024;
        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = cgroup0->cpu.uclamp.max = 60% * 1024;

        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = 40% * 1024; // intact
        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 50% * 1024; // intact

when p0 and p1 are attached to cgroup1, these instead become:

::

        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = cgroup1->cpu.uclamp.min = 60% * 1024;
        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = cgroup1->cpu.uclamp.max = 100% * 1024;

        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = cgroup1->cpu.uclamp.min = 60% * 1024;
        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 50% * 1024; // intact

Note that cgroup interfaces allows cpu.uclamp.max value to be lower than
cpu.uclamp.min. Other interfaces don't allow that.

3.3. System interface
---------------------

3.3.1 sched_util_clamp_min
--------------------------

System wide limit of allowed UCLAMP_MIN range. By default it is set to 1024,
which means that permitted effective UCLAMP_MIN range for tasks is [0:1024].
By changing it to 512 for example the range reduces to [0:512]. This is useful
to restrict how much boosting tasks are allowed to acquire.

Requests from tasks to go above this knob value will still succeed, but
they won't be satisfied until it is more than p->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN].

The value must be smaller than or equal to sched_util_clamp_max.

3.3.2 sched_util_clamp_max
--------------------------

System wide limit of allowed UCLAMP_MAX range. By default it is set to 1024,
which means that permitted effective UCLAMP_MAX range for tasks is [0:1024].

By changing it to 512 for example the effective allowed range reduces to
[0:512]. This means is that no task can run above 512, which implies that all
rqs are restricted too. IOW, the whole system is capped to half its performance
capacity.

This is useful to restrict the overall maximum performance point of the system.
For example, it can be handy to limit performance when running low on battery
or when the system wants to limit access to more energy hungry performance
levels when it's in idle state or screen is off.

Requests from tasks to go above this knob value will still succeed, but they
won't be satisfied until it is more than p->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX].

The value must be greater than or equal to sched_util_clamp_min.

.. _uclamp-default-values:

3.4. Default values
-------------------

By default all SCHED_NORMAL/SCHED_OTHER tasks are initialized to:

::

        p_fair->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = 0
        p_fair->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 1024

That is, by default they're boosted to run at the maximum performance point of
changed at boot or runtime. No argument was made yet as to why we should
provide this, but can be added in the future.

For SCHED_FIFO/SCHED_RR tasks:

::

        p_rt->uclamp[UCLAMP_MIN] = 1024
        p_rt->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 1024

That is by default they're boosted to run at the maximum performance point of
the system which retains the historical behavior of the RT tasks.

RT tasks default uclamp_min value can be modified at boot or runtime via
sysctl. See below section.

.. _sched-util-clamp-min-rt-default:

3.4.1 sched_util_clamp_min_rt_default
-------------------------------------

Running RT tasks at maximum performance point is expensive on battery powered
devices and not necessary. To allow system developer to offer good performance
guarantees for these tasks without pushing it all the way to maximum
performance point, this sysctl knob allows tuning the best boost value to
address the system requirement without burning power running at maximum
performance point all the time.

Application developer are encouraged to use the per task util clamp interface
to ensure they are performance and power aware. Ideally this knob should be set
to 0 by system designers and leave the task of managing performance
requirements to the apps.

4. How to use util clamp
========================

Util clamp promotes the concept of user space assisted power and performance
management. At the scheduler level there is no info required to make the best
decision. However, with util clamp user space can hint to the scheduler to make
better decision about task placement and frequency selection.

Best results are achieved by not making any assumptions about the system the
application is running on and to use it in conjunction with a feedback loop to
dynamically monitor and adjust. Ultimately this will allow for a better user
experience at a better perf/watt.

For some systems and use cases, static setup will help to achieve good results.
Portability will be a problem in this case. How much work one can do at 100,
200 or 1024 is different for each system. Unless there's a specific target
system, static setup should be avoided.

There are enough possibilities to create a whole framework based on util clamp
or self contained app that makes use of it directly.

4.1. Boost important and DVFS-latency-sensitive tasks
-----------------------------------------------------

A GUI task might not be busy to warrant driving the frequency high when it
wakes up. However, it requires to finish its work within a specific time window
to deliver the desired user experience. The right frequency it requires at
wakeup will be system dependent. On some underpowered systems it will be high,
on other overpowered ones it will be low or 0.

This task can increase its UCLAMP_MIN value every time it misses the deadline
to ensure on next wake up it runs at a higher performance point. It should try
to approach the lowest UCLAMP_MIN value that allows to meet its deadline on any
particular system to achieve the best possible perf/watt for that system.

On heterogeneous systems, it might be important for this task to run on
a faster CPU.

**Generally it is advised to perceive the input as performance level or point
which will imply both task placement and frequency selection**.

4.2. Cap background tasks
-------------------------

Like explained for Android case in the introduction. Any app can lower
UCLAMP_MAX for some background tasks that don't care about performance but
could end up being busy and consume unnecessary system resources on the system.

4.3. Powersave mode
-------------------

sched_util_clamp_max system wide interface can be used to limit all tasks from
operating at the higher performance points which are usually energy
inefficient.

This is not unique to uclamp as one can achieve the same by reducing max
frequency of the cpufreq governor. It can be considered a more convenient
alternative interface.

4.4. Per-app performance restriction
------------------------------------

Middleware/Utility can provide the user an option to set UCLAMP_MIN/MAX for an
app every time it is executed to guarantee a minimum performance point and/or
limit it from draining system power at the cost of reduced performance for
these apps.

If you want to prevent your laptop from heating up while on the go from
compiling the kernel and happy to sacrifice performance to save power, but
still would like to keep your browser performance intact, uclamp makes it
possible.

5. Limitations
==============

.. _uclamp-capping-fail:

5.1. Capping frequency with uclamp_max fails under certain conditions
---------------------------------------------------------------------

If task p0 is capped to run at 512:

::

        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 512

and it shares the rq with p1 which is free to run at any performance point:

::

        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 1024

then due to max aggregation the rq will be allowed to reach max performance
point:

::

        rq->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = max(512, 1024) = 1024

Assuming both p0 and p1 have UCLAMP_MIN = 0, then the frequency selection for
the rq will depend on the actual utilization value of the tasks.

If p1 is a small task but p0 is a CPU intensive task, then due to the fact that
both are running at the same rq, p1 will cause the frequency capping to be left
from the rq although p1, which is allowed to run at any performance point,
doesn't actually need to run at that frequency.

5.2. UCLAMP_MAX can break PELT (util_avg) signal
------------------------------------------------

PELT assumes that frequency will always increase as the signals grow to ensure
there's always some idle time on the CPU. But with UCLAMP_MAX, this frequency
increase will be prevented which can lead to no idle time in some
circumstances. When there's no idle time, a task will stuck in a busy loop,
which would result in util_avg being 1024.

Combing with issue described below, this can lead to unwanted frequency spikes
when severely capped tasks share the rq with a small non capped task.

As an example if task p, which have:

::

        p0->util_avg = 300
        p0->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 0

wakes up on an idle CPU, then it will run at min frequency (Fmin) this
CPU is capable of. The max CPU frequency (Fmax) matters here as well,
since it designates the shortest computational time to finish the task's
work on this CPU.

::

        rq->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 0

If the ratio of Fmax/Fmin is 3, then maximum value will be:

::

        300 * (Fmax/Fmin) = 900

which indicates the CPU will still see idle time since 900 is < 1024. The
_actual_ util_avg will not be 900 though, but somewhere between 300 and 900. As
long as there's idle time, p->util_avg updates will be off by a some margin,
but not proportional to Fmax/Fmin.

::

        p0->util_avg = 300 + small_error

Now if the ratio of Fmax/Fmin is 4, the maximum value becomes:

::

        300 * (Fmax/Fmin) = 1200

which is higher than 1024 and indicates that the CPU has no idle time. When
this happens, then the _actual_ util_avg will become:

::

        p0->util_avg = 1024

If task p1 wakes up on this CPU, which have:

::

        p1->util_avg = 200
        p1->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 1024

then the effective UCLAMP_MAX for the CPU will be 1024 according to max
aggregation rule. But since the capped p0 task was running and throttled
severely, then the rq->util_avg will be:

::

        p0->util_avg = 1024
        p1->util_avg = 200

        rq->util_avg = 1024
        rq->uclamp[UCLAMP_MAX] = 1024

Hence lead to a frequency spike since if p0 wasn't throttled we should get:

::

        p0->util_avg = 300
        p1->util_avg = 200

        rq->util_avg = 500

and run somewhere near mid performance point of that CPU, not the Fmax we get.

5.3. Schedutil response time issues
-----------------------------------

schedutil has three limitations:

        1. Hardware takes non-zero time to respond to any frequency change
           request. On some platforms can be in the order of few ms.
        2. Non fast-switch systems require a worker deadline thread to wake up
           and perform the frequency change, which adds measurable overhead.
        3. schedutil rate_limit_us drops any requests during this rate_limit_us
           window.

If a relatively small task is doing critical job and requires a certain
performance point when it wakes up and starts running, then all these
limitations will prevent it from getting what it wants in the time scale it
expects.

This limitation is not only impactful when using uclamp, but will be more
prevalent as we no longer gradually ramp up or down. We could easily be
jumping between frequencies depending on the order tasks wake up, and their
respective uclamp values.

We regard that as a limitation of the capabilities of the underlying system
itself.

There is room to improve the behavior of schedutil rate_limit_us, but not much
to be done for 1 or 2. They are considered hard limitations of the system.
=========
Schedutil
=========

.. note::

   All this assumes a linear relation between frequency and work capacity,
   we know this is flawed, but it is the best workable approximation.


PELT (Per Entity Load Tracking)
===============================

With PELT we track some metrics across the various scheduler entities, from
individual tasks to task-group slices to CPU runqueues. As the basis for this
we use an Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA), each period (1024us)
is decayed such that y^32 = 0.5. That is, the most recent 32ms contribute
half, while the rest of history contribute the other half.

Specifically:

  ewma_sum(u) := u_0 + u_1*y + u_2*y^2 + ...

  ewma(u) = ewma_sum(u) / ewma_sum(1)

Since this is essentially a progression of an infinite geometric series, the
results are composable, that is ewma(A) + ewma(B) = ewma(A+B). This property
is key, since it gives the ability to recompose the averages when tasks move
around.

Note that blocked tasks still contribute to the aggregates (task-group slices
and CPU runqueues), which reflects their expected contribution when they
resume running.

Using this we track 2 key metrics: 'running' and 'runnable'. 'Running'
reflects the time an entity spends on the CPU, while 'runnable' reflects the
time an entity spends on the runqueue. When there is only a single task these
two metrics are the same, but once there is contention for the CPU 'running'
will decrease to reflect the fraction of time each task spends on the CPU
while 'runnable' will increase to reflect the amount of contention.

For more detail see: kernel/sched/pelt.c


Frequency / CPU Invariance
==========================

Because consuming the CPU for 50% at 1GHz is not the same as consuming the CPU
for 50% at 2GHz, nor is running 50% on a LITTLE CPU the same as running 50% on
a big CPU, we allow architectures to scale the time delta with two ratios, one
Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling (DVFS) ratio and one microarch ratio.

For simple DVFS architectures (where software is in full control) we trivially
compute the ratio as::

	    f_cur
  r_dvfs := -----
            f_max

For more dynamic systems where the hardware is in control of DVFS we use
hardware counters (Intel APERF/MPERF, ARMv8.4-AMU) to provide us this ratio.
For Intel specifically, we use::

	   APERF
  f_cur := ----- * P0
	   MPERF

	     4C-turbo;	if available and turbo enabled
  f_max := { 1C-turbo;	if turbo enabled
	     P0;	otherwise

                    f_cur
  r_dvfs := min( 1, ----- )
                    f_max

We pick 4C turbo over 1C turbo to make it slightly more sustainable.

r_cpu is determined as the ratio of highest performance level of the current
CPU vs the highest performance level of any other CPU in the system.

  r_tot = r_dvfs * r_cpu

The result is that the above 'running' and 'runnable' metrics become invariant
of DVFS and CPU type. IOW. we can transfer and compare them between CPUs.

For more detail see:

 - kernel/sched/pelt.h:update_rq_clock_pelt()
 - arch/x86/kernel/smpboot.c:"APERF/MPERF frequency ratio computation."
 - Documentation/scheduler/sched-capacity.rst:"1. CPU Capacity + 2. Task utilization"


UTIL_EST
========

Because periodic tasks have their averages decayed while they sleep, even
though when running their expected utilization will be the same, they suffer a
(DVFS) ramp-up after they are running again.

To alleviate this (a default enabled option) UTIL_EST drives an Infinite
Impulse Response (IIR) EWMA with the 'running' value on dequeue -- when it is
highest. UTIL_EST filters to instantly increase and only decay on decrease.

A further runqueue wide sum (of runnable tasks) is maintained of:

  util_est := \Sum_t max( t_running, t_util_est_ewma )

For more detail see: kernel/sched/fair.c:util_est_dequeue()


UCLAMP
======

It is possible to set effective u_min and u_max clamps on each CFS or RT task;
the runqueue keeps an max aggregate of these clamps for all running tasks.

For more detail see: include/uapi/linux/sched/types.h


Schedutil / DVFS
================

Every time the scheduler load tracking is updated (task wakeup, task
migration, time progression) we call out to schedutil to update the hardware
DVFS state.

The basis is the CPU runqueue's 'running' metric, which per the above it is
the frequency invariant utilization estimate of the CPU. From this we compute
a desired frequency like::

             max( running, util_est );	if UTIL_EST
  u_cfs := { running;			otherwise

               clamp( u_cfs + u_rt , u_min, u_max );	if UCLAMP_TASK
  u_clamp := { u_cfs + u_rt;				otherwise

  u := u_clamp + u_irq + u_dl;		[approx. see source for more detail]

  f_des := min( f_max, 1.25 u * f_max )

XXX IO-wait: when the update is due to a task wakeup from IO-completion we
boost 'u' above.

This frequency is then used to select a P-state/OPP or directly munged into a
CPPC style request to the hardware.

XXX: deadline tasks (Sporadic Task Model) allows us to calculate a hard f_min
required to satisfy the workload.

Because these callbacks are directly from the scheduler, the DVFS hardware
interaction should be 'fast' and non-blocking. Schedutil supports
rate-limiting DVFS requests for when hardware interaction is slow and
expensive, this reduces effectiveness.

For more information see: kernel/sched/cpufreq_schedutil.c


NOTES
=====

 - On low-load scenarios, where DVFS is most relevant, the 'running' numbers
   will closely reflect utilization.

 - In saturated scenarios task movement will cause some transient dips,
   suppose we have a CPU saturated with 4 tasks, then when we migrate a task
   to an idle CPU, the old CPU will have a 'running' value of 0.75 while the
   new CPU will gain 0.25. This is inevitable and time progression will
   correct this. XXX do we still guarantee f_max due to no idle-time?

 - Much of the above is about avoiding DVFS dips, and independent DVFS domains
   having to re-learn / ramp-up when load shifts.

Scheduler pelt c program
------------------------

.. literalinclude:: sched-pelt.c
    :language: c
			 ============================
			 LINUX KERNEL MEMORY BARRIERS
			 ============================

By: David Howells <dhowells@redhat.com>
    Paul E. McKenney <paulmck@linux.ibm.com>
    Will Deacon <will.deacon@arm.com>
    Peter Zijlstra <peterz@infradead.org>

==========
DISCLAIMER
==========

This document is not a specification; it is intentionally (for the sake of
brevity) and unintentionally (due to being human) incomplete. This document is
meant as a guide to using the various memory barriers provided by Linux, but
in case of any doubt (and there are many) please ask.  Some doubts may be
resolved by referring to the formal memory consistency model and related
documentation at tools/memory-model/.  Nevertheless, even this memory
model should be viewed as the collective opinion of its maintainers rather
than as an infallible oracle.

To repeat, this document is not a specification of what Linux expects from
hardware.

The purpose of this document is twofold:

 (1) to specify the minimum functionality that one can rely on for any
     particular barrier, and

 (2) to provide a guide as to how to use the barriers that are available.

Note that an architecture can provide more than the minimum requirement
for any particular barrier, but if the architecture provides less than
that, that architecture is incorrect.

Note also that it is possible that a barrier may be a no-op for an
architecture because the way that arch works renders an explicit barrier
unnecessary in that case.


========
CONTENTS
========

 (*) Abstract memory access model.

     - Device operations.
     - Guarantees.

 (*) What are memory barriers?

     - Varieties of memory barrier.
     - What may not be assumed about memory barriers?
     - Address-dependency barriers (historical).
     - Control dependencies.
     - SMP barrier pairing.
     - Examples of memory barrier sequences.
     - Read memory barriers vs load speculation.
     - Multicopy atomicity.

 (*) Explicit kernel barriers.

     - Compiler barrier.
     - CPU memory barriers.

 (*) Implicit kernel memory barriers.

     - Lock acquisition functions.
     - Interrupt disabling functions.
     - Sleep and wake-up functions.
     - Miscellaneous functions.

 (*) Inter-CPU acquiring barrier effects.

     - Acquires vs memory accesses.

 (*) Where are memory barriers needed?

     - Interprocessor interaction.
     - Atomic operations.
     - Accessing devices.
     - Interrupts.

 (*) Kernel I/O barrier effects.

 (*) Assumed minimum execution ordering model.

 (*) The effects of the cpu cache.

     - Cache coherency vs DMA.
     - Cache coherency vs MMIO.

 (*) The things CPUs get up to.

     - And then there's the Alpha.
     - Virtual Machine Guests.

 (*) Example uses.

     - Circular buffers.

 (*) References.


============================
ABSTRACT MEMORY ACCESS MODEL
============================

Consider the following abstract model of the system:

		            :                :
		            :                :
		            :                :
		+-------+   :   +--------+   :   +-------+
		|       |   :   |        |   :   |       |
		|       |   :   |        |   :   |       |
		| CPU 1 |<----->| Memory |<----->| CPU 2 |
		|       |   :   |        |   :   |       |
		|       |   :   |        |   :   |       |
		+-------+   :   +--------+   :   +-------+
		    ^       :       ^        :       ^
		    |       :       |        :       |
		    |       :       |        :       |
		    |       :       v        :       |
		    |       :   +--------+   :       |
		    |       :   |        |   :       |
		    |       :   |        |   :       |
		    +---------->| Device |<----------+
		            :   |        |   :
		            :   |        |   :
		            :   +--------+   :
		            :                :

Each CPU executes a program that generates memory access operations.  In the
abstract CPU, memory operation ordering is very relaxed, and a CPU may actually
perform the memory operations in any order it likes, provided program causality
appears to be maintained.  Similarly, the compiler may also arrange the
instructions it emits in any order it likes, provided it doesn't affect the
apparent operation of the program.

So in the above diagram, the effects of the memory operations performed by a
CPU are perceived by the rest of the system as the operations cross the
interface between the CPU and rest of the system (the dotted lines).


For example, consider the following sequence of events:

	CPU 1		CPU 2
	===============	===============
	{ A == 1; B == 2 }
	A = 3;		x = B;
	B = 4;		y = A;

The set of accesses as seen by the memory system in the middle can be arranged
in 24 different combinations:

	STORE A=3,	STORE B=4,	y=LOAD A->3,	x=LOAD B->4
	STORE A=3,	STORE B=4,	x=LOAD B->4,	y=LOAD A->3
	STORE A=3,	y=LOAD A->3,	STORE B=4,	x=LOAD B->4
	STORE A=3,	y=LOAD A->3,	x=LOAD B->2,	STORE B=4
	STORE A=3,	x=LOAD B->2,	STORE B=4,	y=LOAD A->3
	STORE A=3,	x=LOAD B->2,	y=LOAD A->3,	STORE B=4
	STORE B=4,	STORE A=3,	y=LOAD A->3,	x=LOAD B->4
	STORE B=4, ...
	...

and can thus result in four different combinations of values:

	x == 2, y == 1
	x == 2, y == 3
	x == 4, y == 1
	x == 4, y == 3


Furthermore, the stores committed by a CPU to the memory system may not be
perceived by the loads made by another CPU in the same order as the stores were
committed.


As a further example, consider this sequence of events:

	CPU 1		CPU 2
	===============	===============
	{ A == 1, B == 2, C == 3, P == &A, Q == &C }
	B = 4;		Q = P;
	P = &B;		D = *Q;

There is an obvious address dependency here, as the value loaded into D depends
on the address retrieved from P by CPU 2.  At the end of the sequence, any of
the following results are possible:

	(Q == &A) and (D == 1)
	(Q == &B) and (D == 2)
	(Q == &B) and (D == 4)

Note that CPU 2 will never try and load C into D because the CPU will load P
into Q before issuing the load of *Q.


DEVICE OPERATIONS
-----------------

Some devices present their control interfaces as collections of memory
locations, but the order in which the control registers are accessed is very
important.  For instance, imagine an ethernet card with a set of internal
registers that are accessed through an address port register (A) and a data
port register (D).  To read internal register 5, the following code might then
be used:

	*A = 5;
	x = *D;

but this might show up as either of the following two sequences:

	STORE *A = 5, x = LOAD *D
	x = LOAD *D, STORE *A = 5

the second of which will almost certainly result in a malfunction, since it set
the address _after_ attempting to read the register.


GUARANTEES
----------

There are some minimal guarantees that may be expected of a CPU:

 (*) On any given CPU, dependent memory accesses will be issued in order, with
     respect to itself.  This means that for:

	Q = READ_ONCE(P); D = READ_ONCE(*Q);

     the CPU will issue the following memory operations:

	Q = LOAD P, D = LOAD *Q

     and always in that order.  However, on DEC Alpha, READ_ONCE() also
     emits a memory-barrier instruction, so that a DEC Alpha CPU will
     instead issue the following memory operations:

	Q = LOAD P, MEMORY_BARRIER, D = LOAD *Q, MEMORY_BARRIER

     Whether on DEC Alpha or not, the READ_ONCE() also prevents compiler
     mischief.

 (*) Overlapping loads and stores within a particular CPU will appear to be
     ordered within that CPU.  This means that for:

	a = READ_ONCE(*X); WRITE_ONCE(*X, b);

     the CPU will only issue the following sequence of memory operations:

	a = LOAD *X, STORE *X = b

     And for:

	WRITE_ONCE(*X, c); d = READ_ONCE(*X);

     the CPU will only issue:

	STORE *X = c, d = LOAD *X

     (Loads and stores overlap if they are targeted at overlapping pieces of
     memory).

And there are a number of things that _must_ or _must_not_ be assumed:

 (*) It _must_not_ be assumed that the compiler will do what you want
     with memory references that are not protected by READ_ONCE() and
     WRITE_ONCE().  Without them, the compiler is within its rights to
     do all sorts of "creative" transformations, which are covered in
     the COMPILER BARRIER section.

 (*) It _must_not_ be assumed that independent loads and stores will be issued
     in the order given.  This means that for:

	X = *A; Y = *B; *D = Z;

     we may get any of the following sequences:

	X = LOAD *A,  Y = LOAD *B,  STORE *D = Z
	X = LOAD *A,  STORE *D = Z, Y = LOAD *B
	Y = LOAD *B,  X = LOAD *A,  STORE *D = Z
	Y = LOAD *B,  STORE *D = Z, X = LOAD *A
	STORE *D = Z, X = LOAD *A,  Y = LOAD *B
	STORE *D = Z, Y = LOAD *B,  X = LOAD *A

 (*) It _must_ be assumed that overlapping memory accesses may be merged or
     discarded.  This means that for:

	X = *A; Y = *(A + 4);

     we may get any one of the following sequences:

	X = LOAD *A; Y = LOAD *(A + 4);
	Y = LOAD *(A + 4); X = LOAD *A;
	{X, Y} = LOAD {*A, *(A + 4) };

     And for:

	*A = X; *(A + 4) = Y;

     we may get any of:

	STORE *A = X; STORE *(A + 4) = Y;
	STORE *(A + 4) = Y; STORE *A = X;
	STORE {*A, *(A + 4) } = {X, Y};

And there are anti-guarantees:

 (*) These guarantees do not apply to bitfields, because compilers often
     generate code to modify these using non-atomic read-modify-write
     sequences.  Do not attempt to use bitfields to synchronize parallel
     algorithms.

 (*) Even in cases where bitfields are protected by locks, all fields
     in a given bitfield must be protected by one lock.  If two fields
     in a given bitfield are protected by different locks, the compiler's
     non-atomic read-modify-write sequences can cause an update to one
     field to corrupt the value of an adjacent field.

 (*) These guarantees apply only to properly aligned and sized scalar
     variables.  "Properly sized" currently means variables that are
     the same size as "char", "short", "int" and "long".  "Properly
     aligned" means the natural alignment, thus no constraints for
     "char", two-byte alignment for "short", four-byte alignment for
     "int", and either four-byte or eight-byte alignment for "long",
     on 32-bit and 64-bit systems, respectively.  Note that these
     guarantees were introduced into the C11 standard, so beware when
     using older pre-C11 compilers (for example, gcc 4.6).  The portion
     of the standard containing this guarantee is Section 3.14, which
     defines "memory location" as follows:

     	memory location
		either an object of scalar type, or a maximal sequence
		of adjacent bit-fields all having nonzero width

		NOTE 1: Two threads of execution can update and access
		separate memory locations without interfering with
		each other.

		NOTE 2: A bit-field and an adjacent non-bit-field member
		are in separate memory locations. The same applies
		to two bit-fields, if one is declared inside a nested
		structure declaration and the other is not, or if the two
		are separated by a zero-length bit-field declaration,
		or if they are separated by a non-bit-field member
		declaration. It is not safe to concurrently update two
		bit-fields in the same structure if all members declared
		between them are also bit-fields, no matter what the
		sizes of those intervening bit-fields happen to be.


=========================
WHAT ARE MEMORY BARRIERS?
=========================

As can be seen above, independent memory operations are effectively performed
in random order, but this can be a problem for CPU-CPU interaction and for I/O.
What is required is some way of intervening to instruct the compiler and the
CPU to restrict the order.

Memory barriers are such interventions.  They impose a perceived partial
ordering over the memory operations on either side of the barrier.

Such enforcement is important because the CPUs and other devices in a system
can use a variety of tricks to improve performance, including reordering,
deferral and combination of memory operations; speculative loads; speculative
branch prediction and various types of caching.  Memory barriers are used to
override or suppress these tricks, allowing the code to sanely control the
interaction of multiple CPUs and/or devices.


VARIETIES OF MEMORY BARRIER
---------------------------

Memory barriers come in four basic varieties:

 (1) Write (or store) memory barriers.

     A write memory barrier gives a guarantee that all the STORE operations
     specified before the barrier will appear to happen before all the STORE
     operations specified after the barrier with respect to the other
     components of the system.

     A write barrier is a partial ordering on stores only; it is not required
     to have any effect on loads.

     A CPU can be viewed as committing a sequence of store operations to the
     memory system as time progresses.  All stores _before_ a write barrier
     will occur _before_ all the stores after the write barrier.

     [!] Note that write barriers should normally be paired with read or
     address-dependency barriers; see the "SMP barrier pairing" subsection.


 (2) Address-dependency barriers (historical).
     [!] This section is marked as HISTORICAL: it covers the long-obsolete
     smp_read_barrier_depends() macro, the semantics of which are now
     implicit in all marked accesses.  For more up-to-date information,
     including how compiler transformations can sometimes break address
     dependencies, see Documentation/RCU/rcu_dereference.rst.

     An address-dependency barrier is a weaker form of read barrier.  In the
     case where two loads are performed such that the second depends on the
     result of the first (eg: the first load retrieves the address to which
     the second load will be directed), an address-dependency barrier would
     be required to make sure that the target of the second load is updated
     after the address obtained by the first load is accessed.

     An address-dependency barrier is a partial ordering on interdependent
     loads only; it is not required to have any effect on stores, independent
     loads or overlapping loads.

     As mentioned in (1), the other CPUs in the system can be viewed as
     committing sequences of stores to the memory system that the CPU being
     considered can then perceive.  An address-dependency barrier issued by
     the CPU under consideration guarantees that for any load preceding it,
     if that load touches one of a sequence of stores from another CPU, then
     by the time the barrier completes, the effects of all the stores prior to
     that touched by the load will be perceptible to any loads issued after
     the address-dependency barrier.

     See the "Examples of memory barrier sequences" subsection for diagrams
     showing the ordering constraints.

     [!] Note that the first load really has to have an _address_ dependency and
     not a control dependency.  If the address for the second load is dependent
     on the first load, but the dependency is through a conditional rather than
     actually loading the address itself, then it's a _control_ dependency and
     a full read barrier or better is required.  See the "Control dependencies"
     subsection for more information.

     [!] Note that address-dependency barriers should normally be paired with
     write barriers; see the "SMP barrier pairing" subsection.

     [!] Kernel release v5.9 removed kernel APIs for explicit address-
     dependency barriers.  Nowadays, APIs for marking loads from shared
     variables such as READ_ONCE() and rcu_dereference() provide implicit
     address-dependency barriers.

 (3) Read (or load) memory barriers.

     A read barrier is an address-dependency barrier plus a guarantee that all
     the LOAD operations specified before the barrier will appear to happen
     before all the LOAD operations specified after the barrier with respect to
     the other components of the system.

     A read barrier is a partial ordering on loads only; it is not required to
     have any effect on stores.

     Read memory barriers imply address-dependency barriers, and so can
     substitute for them.

     [!] Note that read barriers should normally be paired with write barriers;
     see the "SMP barrier pairing" subsection.


 (4) General memory barriers.

     A general memory barrier gives a guarantee that all the LOAD and STORE
     operations specified before the barrier will appear to happen before all
     the LOAD and STORE operations specified after the barrier with respect to
     the other components of the system.

     A general memory barrier is a partial ordering over both loads and stores.

     General memory barriers imply both read and write memory barriers, and so
     can substitute for either.


And a couple of implicit varieties:

 (5) ACQUIRE operations.

     This acts as a one-way permeable barrier.  It guarantees that all memory
     operations after the ACQUIRE operation will appear to happen after the
     ACQUIRE operation with respect to the other components of the system.
     ACQUIRE operations include LOCK operations and both smp_load_acquire()
     and smp_cond_load_acquire() operations.

     Memory operations that occur before an ACQUIRE operation may appear to
     happen after it completes.

     An ACQUIRE operation should almost always be paired with a RELEASE
     operation.


 (6) RELEASE operations.

     This also acts as a one-way permeable barrier.  It guarantees that all
     memory operations before the RELEASE operation will appear to happen
     before the RELEASE operation with respect to the other components of the
     system. RELEASE operations include UNLOCK operations and
     smp_store_release() operations.

     Memory operations that occur after a RELEASE operation may appear to
     happen before it completes.

     The use of ACQUIRE and RELEASE operations generally precludes the need
     for other sorts of memory barrier.  In addition, a RELEASE+ACQUIRE pair is
     -not- guaranteed to act as a full memory barrier.  However, after an
     ACQUIRE on a given variable, all memory accesses preceding any prior
     RELEASE on that same variable are guaranteed to be visible.  In other
     words, within a given variable's critical section, all accesses of all
     previous critical sections for that variable are guaranteed to have
     completed.

     This means that ACQUIRE acts as a minimal "acquire" operation and
     RELEASE acts as a minimal "release" operation.

A subset of the atomic operations described in atomic_t.txt have ACQUIRE and
RELEASE variants in addition to fully-ordered and relaxed (no barrier
semantics) definitions.  For compound atomics performing both a load and a
store, ACQUIRE semantics apply only to the load and RELEASE semantics apply
only to the store portion of the operation.

Memory barriers are only required where there's a possibility of interaction
between two CPUs or between a CPU and a device.  If it can be guaranteed that
there won't be any such interaction in any particular piece of code, then
memory barriers are unnecessary in that piece of code.


Note that these are the _minimum_ guarantees.  Different architectures may give
more substantial guarantees, but they may _not_ be relied upon outside of arch
specific code.


WHAT MAY NOT BE ASSUMED ABOUT MEMORY BARRIERS?
----------------------------------------------

There are certain things that the Linux kernel memory barriers do not guarantee:

 (*) There is no guarantee that any of the memory accesses specified before a
     memory barrier will be _complete_ by the completion of a memory barrier
     instruction; the barrier can be considered to draw a line in that CPU's
     access queue that accesses of the appropriate type may not cross.

 (*) There is no guarantee that issuing a memory barrier on one CPU will have
     any direct effect on another CPU or any other hardware in the system.  The
     indirect effect will be the order in which the second CPU sees the effects
     of the first CPU's accesses occur, but see the next point:

 (*) There is no guarantee that a CPU will see the correct order of effects
     from a second CPU's accesses, even _if_ the second CPU uses a memory
     barrier, unless the first CPU _also_ uses a matching memory barrier (see
     the subsection on "SMP Barrier Pairing").

 (*) There is no guarantee that some intervening piece of off-the-CPU
     hardware[*] will not reorder the memory accesses.  CPU cache coherency
     mechanisms should propagate the indirect effects of a memory barrier
     between CPUs, but might not do so in order.

	[*] For information on bus mastering DMA and coherency please read:

	    Documentation/driver-api/pci/pci.rst
	    Documentation/core-api/dma-api-howto.rst
	    Documentation/core-api/dma-api.rst


ADDRESS-DEPENDENCY BARRIERS (HISTORICAL)
----------------------------------------
[!] This section is marked as HISTORICAL: it covers the long-obsolete
smp_read_barrier_depends() macro, the semantics of which are now implicit
in all marked accesses.  For more up-to-date information, including
how compiler transformations can sometimes break address dependencies,
see Documentation/RCU/rcu_dereference.rst.

As of v4.15 of the Linux kernel, an smp_mb() was added to READ_ONCE() for
DEC Alpha, which means that about the only people who need to pay attention
to this section are those working on DEC Alpha architecture-specific code
and those working on READ_ONCE() itself.  For those who need it, and for
those who are interested in the history, here is the story of
address-dependency barriers.

[!] While address dependencies are observed in both load-to-load and
load-to-store relations, address-dependency barriers are not necessary
for load-to-store situations.

The requirement of address-dependency barriers is a little subtle, and
it's not always obvious that they're needed.  To illustrate, consider the
following sequence of events:

	CPU 1		      CPU 2
	===============	      ===============
	{ A == 1, B == 2, C == 3, P == &A, Q == &C }
	B = 4;
	<write barrier>
	WRITE_ONCE(P, &B);
			      Q = READ_ONCE_OLD(P);
			      D = *Q;

[!] READ_ONCE_OLD() corresponds to READ_ONCE() of pre-4.15 kernel, which
doesn't imply an address-dependency barrier.

There's a clear address dependency here, and it would seem that by the end of
the sequence, Q must be either &A or &B, and that:

	(Q == &A) implies (D == 1)
	(Q == &B) implies (D == 4)

But!  CPU 2's perception of P may be updated _before_ its perception of B, thus
leading to the following situation:

	(Q == &B) and (D == 2) ????

While this may seem like a failure of coherency or causality maintenance, it
isn't, and this behaviour can be observed on certain real CPUs (such as the DEC
Alpha).

To deal with this, READ_ONCE() provides an implicit address-dependency barrier
since kernel release v4.15:

	CPU 1		      CPU 2
	===============	      ===============
	{ A == 1, B == 2, C == 3, P == &A, Q == &C }
	B = 4;
	<write barrier>
	WRITE_ONCE(P, &B);
			      Q = READ_ONCE(P);
			      <implicit address-dependency barrier>
			      D = *Q;

This enforces the occurrence of one of the two implications, and prevents the
third possibility from arising.


[!] Note that this extremely counterintuitive situation arises most easily on
machines with split caches, so that, for example, one cache bank processes
even-numbered cache lines and the other bank processes odd-numbered cache
lines.  The pointer P might be stored in an odd-numbered cache line, and the
variable B might be stored in an even-numbered cache line.  Then, if the
even-numbered bank of the reading CPU's cache is extremely busy while the
odd-numbered bank is idle, one can see the new value of the pointer P (&B),
but the old value of the variable B (2).


An address-dependency barrier is not required to order dependent writes
because the CPUs that the Linux kernel supports don't do writes until they
are certain (1) that the write will actually happen, (2) of the location of
the write, and (3) of the value to be written.
But please carefully read the "CONTROL DEPENDENCIES" section and the
Documentation/RCU/rcu_dereference.rst file:  The compiler can and does break
dependencies in a great many highly creative ways.

	CPU 1		      CPU 2
	===============	      ===============
	{ A == 1, B == 2, C = 3, P == &A, Q == &C }
	B = 4;
	<write barrier>
	WRITE_ONCE(P, &B);
			      Q = READ_ONCE_OLD(P);
			      WRITE_ONCE(*Q, 5);

Therefore, no address-dependency barrier is required to order the read into
Q with the store into *Q.  In other words, this outcome is prohibited,
even without an implicit address-dependency barrier of modern READ_ONCE():

	(Q == &B) && (B == 4)

Please note that this pattern should be rare.  After all, the whole point
of dependency ordering is to -prevent- writes to the data structure, along
with the expensive cache misses associated with those writes.  This pattern
can be used to record rare error conditions and the like, and the CPUs'
naturally occurring ordering prevents such records from being lost.


Note well that the ordering provided by an address dependency is local to
the CPU containing it.  See the section on "Multicopy atomicity" for
more information.


The address-dependency barrier is very important to the RCU system,
for example.  See rcu_assign_pointer() and rcu_dereference() in
include/linux/rcupdate.h.  This permits the current target of an RCU'd
pointer to be replaced with a new modified target, without the replacement
target appearing to be incompletely initialised.


CONTROL DEPENDENCIES
--------------------

Control dependencies can be a bit tricky because current compilers do
not understand them.  The purpose of this section is to help you prevent
the compiler's ignorance from breaking your code.

A load-load control dependency requires a full read memory barrier, not
simply an (implicit) address-dependency barrier to make it work correctly.
Consider the following bit of code:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	<implicit address-dependency barrier>
	if (q) {
		/* BUG: No address dependency!!! */
		p = READ_ONCE(b);
	}

This will not have the desired effect because there is no actual address
dependency, but rather a control dependency that the CPU may short-circuit
by attempting to predict the outcome in advance, so that other CPUs see
the load from b as having happened before the load from a.  In such a case
what's actually required is:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	if (q) {
		<read barrier>
		p = READ_ONCE(b);
	}

However, stores are not speculated.  This means that ordering -is- provided
for load-store control dependencies, as in the following example:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	if (q) {
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);
	}

Control dependencies pair normally with other types of barriers.
That said, please note that neither READ_ONCE() nor WRITE_ONCE()
are optional! Without the READ_ONCE(), the compiler might combine the
load from 'a' with other loads from 'a'.  Without the WRITE_ONCE(),
the compiler might combine the store to 'b' with other stores to 'b'.
Either can result in highly counterintuitive effects on ordering.

Worse yet, if the compiler is able to prove (say) that the value of
variable 'a' is always non-zero, it would be well within its rights
to optimize the original example by eliminating the "if" statement
as follows:

	q = a;
	b = 1;  /* BUG: Compiler and CPU can both reorder!!! */

So don't leave out the READ_ONCE().

It is tempting to try to enforce ordering on identical stores on both
branches of the "if" statement as follows:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	if (q) {
		barrier();
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);
		do_something();
	} else {
		barrier();
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);
		do_something_else();
	}

Unfortunately, current compilers will transform this as follows at high
optimization levels:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	barrier();
	WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);  /* BUG: No ordering vs. load from a!!! */
	if (q) {
		/* WRITE_ONCE(b, 1); -- moved up, BUG!!! */
		do_something();
	} else {
		/* WRITE_ONCE(b, 1); -- moved up, BUG!!! */
		do_something_else();
	}

Now there is no conditional between the load from 'a' and the store to
'b', which means that the CPU is within its rights to reorder them:
The conditional is absolutely required, and must be present in the
assembly code even after all compiler optimizations have been applied.
Therefore, if you need ordering in this example, you need explicit
memory barriers, for example, smp_store_release():

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	if (q) {
		smp_store_release(&b, 1);
		do_something();
	} else {
		smp_store_release(&b, 1);
		do_something_else();
	}

In contrast, without explicit memory barriers, two-legged-if control
ordering is guaranteed only when the stores differ, for example:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	if (q) {
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);
		do_something();
	} else {
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 2);
		do_something_else();
	}

The initial READ_ONCE() is still required to prevent the compiler from
proving the value of 'a'.

In addition, you need to be careful what you do with the local variable 'q',
otherwise the compiler might be able to guess the value and again remove
the needed conditional.  For example:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	if (q % MAX) {
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);
		do_something();
	} else {
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 2);
		do_something_else();
	}

If MAX is defined to be 1, then the compiler knows that (q % MAX) is
equal to zero, in which case the compiler is within its rights to
transform the above code into the following:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	WRITE_ONCE(b, 2);
	do_something_else();

Given this transformation, the CPU is not required to respect the ordering
between the load from variable 'a' and the store to variable 'b'.  It is
tempting to add a barrier(), but this does not help.  The conditional
is gone, and the barrier won't bring it back.  Therefore, if you are
relying on this ordering, you should make sure that MAX is greater than
one, perhaps as follows:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	BUILD_BUG_ON(MAX <= 1); /* Order load from a with store to b. */
	if (q % MAX) {
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);
		do_something();
	} else {
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 2);
		do_something_else();
	}

Please note once again that the stores to 'b' differ.  If they were
identical, as noted earlier, the compiler could pull this store outside
of the 'if' statement.

You must also be careful not to rely too much on boolean short-circuit
evaluation.  Consider this example:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	if (q || 1 > 0)
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);

Because the first condition cannot fault and the second condition is
always true, the compiler can transform this example as following,
defeating control dependency:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);

This example underscores the need to ensure that the compiler cannot
out-guess your code.  More generally, although READ_ONCE() does force
the compiler to actually emit code for a given load, it does not force
the compiler to use the results.

In addition, control dependencies apply only to the then-clause and
else-clause of the if-statement in question.  In particular, it does
not necessarily apply to code following the if-statement:

	q = READ_ONCE(a);
	if (q) {
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 1);
	} else {
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 2);
	}
	WRITE_ONCE(c, 1);  /* BUG: No ordering against the read from 'a'. */

It is tempting to argue that there in fact is ordering because the
compiler cannot reorder volatile accesses and also cannot reorder
the writes to 'b' with the condition.  Unfortunately for this line
of reasoning, the compiler might compile the two writes to 'b' as
conditional-move instructions, as in this fanciful pseudo-assembly
language:

	ld r1,a
	cmp r1,$0
	cmov,ne r4,$1
	cmov,eq r4,$2
	st r4,b
	st $1,c

A weakly ordered CPU would have no dependency of any sort between the load
from 'a' and the store to 'c'.  The control dependencies would extend
only to the pair of cmov instructions and the store depending on them.
In short, control dependencies apply only to the stores in the then-clause
and else-clause of the if-statement in question (including functions
invoked by those two clauses), not to code following that if-statement.


Note well that the ordering provided by a control dependency is local
to the CPU containing it.  See the section on "Multicopy atomicity"
for more information.


In summary:

  (*) Control dependencies can order prior loads against later stores.
      However, they do -not- guarantee any other sort of ordering:
      Not prior loads against later loads, nor prior stores against
      later anything.  If you need these other forms of ordering,
      use smp_rmb(), smp_wmb(), or, in the case of prior stores and
      later loads, smp_mb().

  (*) If both legs of the "if" statement begin with identical stores to
      the same variable, then those stores must be ordered, either by
      preceding both of them with smp_mb() or by using smp_store_release()
      to carry out the stores.  Please note that it is -not- sufficient
      to use barrier() at beginning of each leg of the "if" statement
      because, as shown by the example above, optimizing compilers can
      destroy the control dependency while respecting the letter of the
      barrier() law.

  (*) Control dependencies require at least one run-time conditional
      between the prior load and the subsequent store, and this
      conditional must involve the prior load.  If the compiler is able
      to optimize the conditional away, it will have also optimized
      away the ordering.  Careful use of READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE()
      can help to preserve the needed conditional.

  (*) Control dependencies require that the compiler avoid reordering the
      dependency into nonexistence.  Careful use of READ_ONCE() or
      atomic{,64}_read() can help to preserve your control dependency.
      Please see the COMPILER BARRIER section for more information.

  (*) Control dependencies apply only to the then-clause and else-clause
      of the if-statement containing the control dependency, including
      any functions that these two clauses call.  Control dependencies
      do -not- apply to code following the if-statement containing the
      control dependency.

  (*) Control dependencies pair normally with other types of barriers.

  (*) Control dependencies do -not- provide multicopy atomicity.  If you
      need all the CPUs to see a given store at the same time, use smp_mb().

  (*) Compilers do not understand control dependencies.  It is therefore
      your job to ensure that they do not break your code.


SMP BARRIER PAIRING
-------------------

When dealing with CPU-CPU interactions, certain types of memory barrier should
always be paired.  A lack of appropriate pairing is almost certainly an error.

General barriers pair with each other, though they also pair with most
other types of barriers, albeit without multicopy atomicity.  An acquire
barrier pairs with a release barrier, but both may also pair with other
barriers, including of course general barriers.  A write barrier pairs
with an address-dependency barrier, a control dependency, an acquire barrier,
a release barrier, a read barrier, or a general barrier.  Similarly a
read barrier, control dependency, or an address-dependency barrier pairs
with a write barrier, an acquire barrier, a release barrier, or a
general barrier:

	CPU 1		      CPU 2
	===============	      ===============
	WRITE_ONCE(a, 1);
	<write barrier>
	WRITE_ONCE(b, 2);     x = READ_ONCE(b);
			      <read barrier>
			      y = READ_ONCE(a);

Or:

	CPU 1		      CPU 2
	===============	      ===============================
	a = 1;
	<write barrier>
	WRITE_ONCE(b, &a);    x = READ_ONCE(b);
			      <implicit address-dependency barrier>
			      y = *x;

Or even:

	CPU 1		      CPU 2
	===============	      ===============================
	r1 = READ_ONCE(y);
	<general barrier>
	WRITE_ONCE(x, 1);     if (r2 = READ_ONCE(x)) {
			         <implicit control dependency>
			         WRITE_ONCE(y, 1);
			      }

	assert(r1 == 0 || r2 == 0);

Basically, the read barrier always has to be there, even though it can be of
the "weaker" type.

[!] Note that the stores before the write barrier would normally be expected to
match the loads after the read barrier or the address-dependency barrier, and
vice versa:

	CPU 1                               CPU 2
	===================                 ===================
	WRITE_ONCE(a, 1);    }----   --->{  v = READ_ONCE(c);
	WRITE_ONCE(b, 2);    }    \ /    {  w = READ_ONCE(d);
	<write barrier>            \        <read barrier>
	WRITE_ONCE(c, 3);    }    / \    {  x = READ_ONCE(a);
	WRITE_ONCE(d, 4);    }----   --->{  y = READ_ONCE(b);


EXAMPLES OF MEMORY BARRIER SEQUENCES
------------------------------------

Firstly, write barriers act as partial orderings on store operations.
Consider the following sequence of events:

	CPU 1
	=======================
	STORE A = 1
	STORE B = 2
	STORE C = 3
	<write barrier>
	STORE D = 4
	STORE E = 5

This sequence of events is committed to the memory coherence system in an order
that the rest of the system might perceive as the unordered set of { STORE A,
STORE B, STORE C } all occurring before the unordered set of { STORE D, STORE E
}:

	+-------+       :      :
	|       |       +------+
	|       |------>| C=3  |     }     /\
	|       |  :    +------+     }-----  \  -----> Events perceptible to
	|       |  :    | A=1  |     }        \/       the rest of the system
	|       |  :    +------+     }
	| CPU 1 |  :    | B=2  |     }
	|       |       +------+     }
	|       |   wwwwwwwwwwwwwwww }   <--- At this point the write barrier
	|       |       +------+     }        requires all stores prior to the
	|       |  :    | E=5  |     }        barrier to be committed before
	|       |  :    +------+     }        further stores may take place
	|       |------>| D=4  |     }
	|       |       +------+
	+-------+       :      :
	                   |
	                   | Sequence in which stores are committed to the
	                   | memory system by CPU 1
	                   V


Secondly, address-dependency barriers act as partial orderings on address-
dependent loads.  Consider the following sequence of events:

	CPU 1			CPU 2
	=======================	=======================
		{ B = 7; X = 9; Y = 8; C = &Y }
	STORE A = 1
	STORE B = 2
	<write barrier>
	STORE C = &B		LOAD X
	STORE D = 4		LOAD C (gets &B)
				LOAD *C (reads B)

Without intervention, CPU 2 may perceive the events on CPU 1 in some
effectively random order, despite the write barrier issued by CPU 1:

	+-------+       :      :                :       :
	|       |       +------+                +-------+  | Sequence of update
	|       |------>| B=2  |-----       --->| Y->8  |  | of perception on
	|       |  :    +------+     \          +-------+  | CPU 2
	| CPU 1 |  :    | A=1  |      \     --->| C->&Y |  V
	|       |       +------+       |        +-------+
	|       |   wwwwwwwwwwwwwwww   |        :       :
	|       |       +------+       |        :       :
	|       |  :    | C=&B |---    |        :       :       +-------+
	|       |  :    +------+   \   |        +-------+       |       |
	|       |------>| D=4  |    ----------->| C->&B |------>|       |
	|       |       +------+       |        +-------+       |       |
	+-------+       :      :       |        :       :       |       |
	                               |        :       :       |       |
	                               |        :       :       | CPU 2 |
	                               |        +-------+       |       |
	    Apparently incorrect --->  |        | B->7  |------>|       |
	    perception of B (!)        |        +-------+       |       |
	                               |        :       :       |       |
	                               |        +-------+       |       |
	    The load of X holds --->    \       | X->9  |------>|       |
	    up the maintenance           \      +-------+       |       |
	    of coherence of B             ----->| B->2  |       +-------+
	                                        +-------+
	                                        :       :


In the above example, CPU 2 perceives that B is 7, despite the load of *C
(which would be B) coming after the LOAD of C.

If, however, an address-dependency barrier were to be placed between the load
of C and the load of *C (ie: B) on CPU 2:

	CPU 1			CPU 2
	=======================	=======================
		{ B = 7; X = 9; Y = 8; C = &Y }
	STORE A = 1
	STORE B = 2
	<write barrier>
	STORE C = &B		LOAD X
	STORE D = 4		LOAD C (gets &B)
				<address-dependency barrier>
				LOAD *C (reads B)

then the following will occur:

	+-------+       :      :                :       :
	|       |       +------+                +-------+
	|       |------>| B=2  |-----       --->| Y->8  |
	|       |  :    +------+     \          +-------+
	| CPU 1 |  :    | A=1  |      \     --->| C->&Y |
	|       |       +------+       |        +-------+
	|       |   wwwwwwwwwwwwwwww   |        :       :
	|       |       +------+       |        :       :
	|       |  :    | C=&B |---    |        :       :       +-------+
	|       |  :    +------+   \   |        +-------+       |       |
	|       |------>| D=4  |    ----------->| C->&B |------>|       |
	|       |       +------+       |        +-------+       |       |
	+-------+       :      :       |        :       :       |       |
	                               |        :       :       |       |
	                               |        :       :       | CPU 2 |
	                               |        +-------+       |       |
	                               |        | X->9  |------>|       |
	                               |        +-------+       |       |
	  Makes sure all effects --->   \   aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa   |       |
	  prior to the store of C        \      +-------+       |       |
	  are perceptible to              ----->| B->2  |------>|       |
	  subsequent loads                      +-------+       |       |
	                                        :       :       +-------+


And thirdly, a read barrier acts as a partial order on loads.  Consider the
following sequence of events:

	CPU 1			CPU 2
	=======================	=======================
		{ A = 0, B = 9 }
	STORE A=1
	<write barrier>
	STORE B=2
				LOAD B
				LOAD A

Without intervention, CPU 2 may then choose to perceive the events on CPU 1 in
some effectively random order, despite the write barrier issued by CPU 1:

	+-------+       :      :                :       :
	|       |       +------+                +-------+
	|       |------>| A=1  |------      --->| A->0  |
	|       |       +------+      \         +-------+
	| CPU 1 |   wwwwwwwwwwwwwwww   \    --->| B->9  |
	|       |       +------+        |       +-------+
	|       |------>| B=2  |---     |       :       :
	|       |       +------+   \    |       :       :       +-------+
	+-------+       :      :    \   |       +-------+       |       |
	                             ---------->| B->2  |------>|       |
	                                |       +-------+       | CPU 2 |
	                                |       | A->0  |------>|       |
	                                |       +-------+       |       |
	                                |       :       :       +-------+
	                                 \      :       :
	                                  \     +-------+
	                                   ---->| A->1  |
	                                        +-------+
	                                        :       :


If, however, a read barrier were to be placed between the load of B and the
load of A on CPU 2:

	CPU 1			CPU 2
	=======================	=======================
		{ A = 0, B = 9 }
	STORE A=1
	<write barrier>
	STORE B=2
				LOAD B
				<read barrier>
				LOAD A

then the partial ordering imposed by CPU 1 will be perceived correctly by CPU
2:

	+-------+       :      :                :       :
	|       |       +------+                +-------+
	|       |------>| A=1  |------      --->| A->0  |
	|       |       +------+      \         +-------+
	| CPU 1 |   wwwwwwwwwwwwwwww   \    --->| B->9  |
	|       |       +------+        |       +-------+
	|       |------>| B=2  |---     |       :       :
	|       |       +------+   \    |       :       :       +-------+
	+-------+       :      :    \   |       +-------+       |       |
	                             ---------->| B->2  |------>|       |
	                                |       +-------+       | CPU 2 |
	                                |       :       :       |       |
	                                |       :       :       |       |
	  At this point the read ---->   \  rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr   |       |
	  barrier causes all effects      \     +-------+       |       |
	  prior to the storage of B        ---->| A->1  |------>|       |
	  to be perceptible to CPU 2            +-------+       |       |
	                                        :       :       +-------+


To illustrate this more completely, consider what could happen if the code
contained a load of A either side of the read barrier:

	CPU 1			CPU 2
	=======================	=======================
		{ A = 0, B = 9 }
	STORE A=1
	<write barrier>
	STORE B=2
				LOAD B
				LOAD A [first load of A]
				<read barrier>
				LOAD A [second load of A]

Even though the two loads of A both occur after the load of B, they may both
come up with different values:

	+-------+       :      :                :       :
	|       |       +------+                +-------+
	|       |------>| A=1  |------      --->| A->0  |
	|       |       +------+      \         +-------+
	| CPU 1 |   wwwwwwwwwwwwwwww   \    --->| B->9  |
	|       |       +------+        |       +-------+
	|       |------>| B=2  |---     |       :       :
	|       |       +------+   \    |       :       :       +-------+
	+-------+       :      :    \   |       +-------+       |       |
	                             ---------->| B->2  |------>|       |
	                                |       +-------+       | CPU 2 |
	                                |       :       :       |       |
	                                |       :       :       |       |
	                                |       +-------+       |       |
	                                |       | A->0  |------>| 1st   |
	                                |       +-------+       |       |
	  At this point the read ---->   \  rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr   |       |
	  barrier causes all effects      \     +-------+       |       |
	  prior to the storage of B        ---->| A->1  |------>| 2nd   |
	  to be perceptible to CPU 2            +-------+       |       |
	                                        :       :       +-------+


But it may be that the update to A from CPU 1 becomes perceptible to CPU 2
before the read barrier completes anyway:

	+-------+       :      :                :       :
	|       |       +------+                +-------+
	|       |------>| A=1  |------      --->| A->0  |
	|       |       +------+      \         +-------+
	| CPU 1 |   wwwwwwwwwwwwwwww   \    --->| B->9  |
	|       |       +------+        |       +-------+
	|       |------>| B=2  |---     |       :       :
	|       |       +------+   \    |       :       :       +-------+
	+-------+       :      :    \   |       +-------+       |       |
	                             ---------->| B->2  |------>|       |
	                                |       +-------+       | CPU 2 |
	                                |       :       :       |       |
	                                 \      :       :       |       |
	                                  \     +-------+       |       |
	                                   ---->| A->1  |------>| 1st   |
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	                                    rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr   |       |
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	                                        | A->1  |------>| 2nd   |
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	                                        :       :       +-------+


The guarantee is that the second load will always come up with A == 1 if the
load of B came up with B == 2.  No such guarantee exists for the first load of
A; that may come up with either A == 0 or A == 1.


READ MEMORY BARRIERS VS LOAD SPECULATION
----------------------------------------

Many CPUs speculate with loads: that is they see that they will need to load an
item from memory, and they find a time where they're not using the bus for any
other loads, and so do the load in advance - even though they haven't actually
got to that point in the instruction execution flow yet.  This permits the
actual load instruction to potentially complete immediately because the CPU
already has the value to hand.

It may turn out that the CPU didn't actually need the value - perhaps because a
branch circumvented the load - in which case it can discard the value or just
cache it for later use.

Consider:

	CPU 1			CPU 2
	=======================	=======================
				LOAD B
				DIVIDE		} Divide instructions generally
				DIVIDE		} take a long time to perform
				LOAD A

Which might appear as this:

	                                        :       :       +-------+
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	                                    --->| B->2  |------>|       |
	                                        +-------+       | CPU 2 |
	                                        :       :DIVIDE |       |
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	The CPU being busy doing a --->     --->| A->0  |~~~~   |       |
	division speculates on the              +-------+   ~   |       |
	LOAD of A                               :       :   ~   |       |
	                                        :       :DIVIDE |       |
	                                        :       :   ~   |       |
	Once the divisions are complete -->     :       :   ~-->|       |
	the CPU can then perform the            :       :       |       |
	LOAD with immediate effect              :       :       +-------+


Placing a read barrier or an address-dependency barrier just before the second
load:

	CPU 1			CPU 2
	=======================	=======================
				LOAD B
				DIVIDE
				DIVIDE
				<read barrier>
				LOAD A

will force any value speculatively obtained to be reconsidered to an extent
dependent on the type of barrier used.  If there was no change made to the
speculated memory location, then the speculated value will just be used:

	                                        :       :       +-------+
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	                                    --->| B->2  |------>|       |
	                                        +-------+       | CPU 2 |
	                                        :       :DIVIDE |       |
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	The CPU being busy doing a --->     --->| A->0  |~~~~   |       |
	division speculates on the              +-------+   ~   |       |
	LOAD of A                               :       :   ~   |       |
	                                        :       :DIVIDE |       |
	                                        :       :   ~   |       |
	                                        :       :   ~   |       |
	                                    rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr~   |       |
	                                        :       :   ~   |       |
	                                        :       :   ~-->|       |
	                                        :       :       |       |
	                                        :       :       +-------+


but if there was an update or an invalidation from another CPU pending, then
the speculation will be cancelled and the value reloaded:

	                                        :       :       +-------+
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	                                    --->| B->2  |------>|       |
	                                        +-------+       | CPU 2 |
	                                        :       :DIVIDE |       |
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	The CPU being busy doing a --->     --->| A->0  |~~~~   |       |
	division speculates on the              +-------+   ~   |       |
	LOAD of A                               :       :   ~   |       |
	                                        :       :DIVIDE |       |
	                                        :       :   ~   |       |
	                                        :       :   ~   |       |
	                                    rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr   |       |
	                                        +-------+       |       |
	The speculation is discarded --->   --->| A->1  |------>|       |
	and an updated value is                 +-------+       |       |
	retrieved                               :       :       +-------+


MULTICOPY ATOMICITY
--------------------

Multicopy atomicity is a deeply intuitive notion about ordering that is
not always provided by real computer systems, namely that a given store
becomes visible at the same time to all CPUs, or, alternatively, that all
CPUs agree on the order in which all stores become visible.  However,
support of full multicopy atomicity would rule out valuable hardware
optimizations, so a weaker form called ``other multicopy atomicity''
instead guarantees only that a given store becomes visible at the same
time to all -other- CPUs.  The remainder of this document discusses this
weaker form, but for brevity will call it simply ``multicopy atomicity''.

The following example demonstrates multicopy atomicity:

	CPU 1			CPU 2			CPU 3
	=======================	=======================	=======================
		{ X = 0, Y = 0 }
	STORE X=1		r1=LOAD X (reads 1)	LOAD Y (reads 1)
				<general barrier>	<read barrier>
				STORE Y=r1		LOAD X

Suppose that CPU 2's load from X returns 1, which it then stores to Y,
and CPU 3's load from Y returns 1.  This indicates that CPU 1's store
to X precedes CPU 2's load from X and that CPU 2's store to Y precedes
CPU 3's load from Y.  In addition, the memory barriers guarantee that
CPU 2 executes its load before its store, and CPU 3 loads from Y before
it loads from X.  The question is then "Can CPU 3's load from X return 0?"

Because CPU 3's load from X in some sense comes after CPU 2's load, it
is natural to expect that CPU 3's load from X must therefore return 1.
This expectation follows from multicopy atomicity: if a load executing
on CPU B follows a load from the same variable executing on CPU A (and
CPU A did not originally store the value which it read), then on
multicopy-atomic systems, CPU B's load must return either the same value
that CPU A's load did or some later value.  However, the Linux kernel
does not require systems to be multicopy atomic.

The use of a general memory barrier in the example above compensates
for any lack of multicopy atomicity.  In the example, if CPU 2's load
from X returns 1 and CPU 3's load from Y returns 1, then CPU 3's load
from X must indeed also return 1.

However, dependencies, read barriers, and write barriers are not always
able to compensate for non-multicopy atomicity.  For example, suppose
that CPU 2's general barrier is removed from the above example, leaving
only the data dependency shown below:

	CPU 1			CPU 2			CPU 3
	=======================	=======================	=======================
		{ X = 0, Y = 0 }
	STORE X=1		r1=LOAD X (reads 1)	LOAD Y (reads 1)
				<data dependency>	<read barrier>
				STORE Y=r1		LOAD X (reads 0)

This substitution allows non-multicopy atomicity to run rampant: in
this example, it is perfectly legal for CPU 2's load from X to return 1,
CPU 3's load from Y to return 1, and its load from X to return 0.

The key point is that although CPU 2's data dependency orders its load
and store, it does not guarantee to order CPU 1's store.  Thus, if this
example runs on a non-multicopy-atomic system where CPUs 1 and 2 share a
store buffer or a level of cache, CPU 2 might have early access to CPU 1's
writes.  General barriers are therefore required to ensure that all CPUs
agree on the combined order of multiple accesses.

General barriers can compensate not only for non-multicopy atomicity,
but can also generate additional ordering that can ensure that -all-
CPUs will perceive the same order of -all- operations.  In contrast, a
chain of release-acquire pairs do not provide this additional ordering,
which means that only those CPUs on the chain are guaranteed to agree
on the combined order of the accesses.  For example, switching to C code
in deference to the ghost of Herman Hollerith:

	int u, v, x, y, z;

	void cpu0(void)
	{
		r0 = smp_load_acquire(&x);
		WRITE_ONCE(u, 1);
		smp_store_release(&y, 1);
	}

	void cpu1(void)
	{
		r1 = smp_load_acquire(&y);
		r4 = READ_ONCE(v);
		r5 = READ_ONCE(u);
		smp_store_release(&z, 1);
	}

	void cpu2(void)
	{
		r2 = smp_load_acquire(&z);
		smp_store_release(&x, 1);
	}

	void cpu3(void)
	{
		WRITE_ONCE(v, 1);
		smp_mb();
		r3 = READ_ONCE(u);
	}

Because cpu0(), cpu1(), and cpu2() participate in a chain of
smp_store_release()/smp_load_acquire() pairs, the following outcome
is prohibited:

	r0 == 1 && r1 == 1 && r2 == 1

Furthermore, because of the release-acquire relationship between cpu0()
and cpu1(), cpu1() must see cpu0()'s writes, so that the following
outcome is prohibited:

	r1 == 1 && r5 == 0

However, the ordering provided by a release-acquire chain is local
to the CPUs participating in that chain and does not apply to cpu3(),
at least aside from stores.  Therefore, the following outcome is possible:

	r0 == 0 && r1 == 1 && r2 == 1 && r3 == 0 && r4 == 0

As an aside, the following outcome is also possible:

	r0 == 0 && r1 == 1 && r2 == 1 && r3 == 0 && r4 == 0 && r5 == 1

Although cpu0(), cpu1(), and cpu2() will see their respective reads and
writes in order, CPUs not involved in the release-acquire chain might
well disagree on the order.  This disagreement stems from the fact that
the weak memory-barrier instructions used to implement smp_load_acquire()
and smp_store_release() are not required to order prior stores against
subsequent loads in all cases.  This means that cpu3() can see cpu0()'s
store to u as happening -after- cpu1()'s load from v, even though
both cpu0() and cpu1() agree that these two operations occurred in the
intended order.

However, please keep in mind that smp_load_acquire() is not magic.
In particular, it simply reads from its argument with ordering.  It does
-not- ensure that any particular value will be read.  Therefore, the
following outcome is possible:

	r0 == 0 && r1 == 0 && r2 == 0 && r5 == 0

Note that this outcome can happen even on a mythical sequentially
consistent system where nothing is ever reordered.

To reiterate, if your code requires full ordering of all operations,
use general barriers throughout.


========================
EXPLICIT KERNEL BARRIERS
========================

The Linux kernel has a variety of different barriers that act at different
levels:

  (*) Compiler barrier.

  (*) CPU memory barriers.


COMPILER BARRIER
----------------

The Linux kernel has an explicit compiler barrier function that prevents the
compiler from moving the memory accesses either side of it to the other side:

	barrier();

This is a general barrier -- there are no read-read or write-write
variants of barrier().  However, READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() can be
thought of as weak forms of barrier() that affect only the specific
accesses flagged by the READ_ONCE() or WRITE_ONCE().

The barrier() function has the following effects:

 (*) Prevents the compiler from reordering accesses following the
     barrier() to precede any accesses preceding the barrier().
     One example use for this property is to ease communication between
     interrupt-handler code and the code that was interrupted.

 (*) Within a loop, forces the compiler to load the variables used
     in that loop's conditional on each pass through that loop.

The READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() functions can prevent any number of
optimizations that, while perfectly safe in single-threaded code, can
be fatal in concurrent code.  Here are some examples of these sorts
of optimizations:

 (*) The compiler is within its rights to reorder loads and stores
     to the same variable, and in some cases, the CPU is within its
     rights to reorder loads to the same variable.  This means that
     the following code:

	a[0] = x;
	a[1] = x;

     Might result in an older value of x stored in a[1] than in a[0].
     Prevent both the compiler and the CPU from doing this as follows:

	a[0] = READ_ONCE(x);
	a[1] = READ_ONCE(x);

     In short, READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() provide cache coherence for
     accesses from multiple CPUs to a single variable.

 (*) The compiler is within its rights to merge successive loads from
     the same variable.  Such merging can cause the compiler to "optimize"
     the following code:

	while (tmp = a)
		do_something_with(tmp);

     into the following code, which, although in some sense legitimate
     for single-threaded code, is almost certainly not what the developer
     intended:

	if (tmp = a)
		for (;;)
			do_something_with(tmp);

     Use READ_ONCE() to prevent the compiler from doing this to you:

	while (tmp = READ_ONCE(a))
		do_something_with(tmp);

 (*) The compiler is within its rights to reload a variable, for example,
     in cases where high register pressure prevents the compiler from
     keeping all data of interest in registers.  The compiler might
     therefore optimize the variable 'tmp' out of our previous example:

	while (tmp = a)
		do_something_with(tmp);

     This could result in the following code, which is perfectly safe in
     single-threaded code, but can be fatal in concurrent code:

	while (a)
		do_something_with(a);

     For example, the optimized version of this code could result in
     passing a zero to do_something_with() in the case where the variable
     a was modified by some other CPU between the "while" statement and
     the call to do_something_with().

     Again, use READ_ONCE() to prevent the compiler from doing this:

	while (tmp = READ_ONCE(a))
		do_something_with(tmp);

     Note that if the compiler runs short of registers, it might save
     tmp onto the stack.  The overhead of this saving and later restoring
     is why compilers reload variables.  Doing so is perfectly safe for
     single-threaded code, so you need to tell the compiler about cases
     where it is not safe.

 (*) The compiler is within its rights to omit a load entirely if it knows
     what the value will be.  For example, if the compiler can prove that
     the value of variable 'a' is always zero, it can optimize this code:

	while (tmp = a)
		do_something_with(tmp);

     Into this:

	do { } while (0);

     This transformation is a win for single-threaded code because it
     gets rid of a load and a branch.  The problem is that the compiler
     will carry out its proof assuming that the current CPU is the only
     one updating variable 'a'.  If variable 'a' is shared, then the
     compiler's proof will be erroneous.  Use READ_ONCE() to tell the
     compiler that it doesn't know as much as it thinks it does:

	while (tmp = READ_ONCE(a))
		do_something_with(tmp);

     But please note that the compiler is also closely watching what you
     do with the value after the READ_ONCE().  For example, suppose you
     do the following and MAX is a preprocessor macro with the value 1:

	while ((tmp = READ_ONCE(a)) % MAX)
		do_something_with(tmp);

     Then the compiler knows that the result of the "%" operator applied
     to MAX will always be zero, again allowing the compiler to optimize
     the code into near-nonexistence.  (It will still load from the
     variable 'a'.)

 (*) Similarly, the compiler is within its rights to omit a store entirely
     if it knows that the variable already has the value being stored.
     Again, the compiler assumes that the current CPU is the only one
     storing into the variable, which can cause the compiler to do the
     wrong thing for shared variables.  For example, suppose you have
     the following:

	a = 0;
	... Code that does not store to variable a ...
	a = 0;

     The compiler sees that the value of variable 'a' is already zero, so
     it might well omit the second store.  This would come as a fatal
     surprise if some other CPU might have stored to variable 'a' in the
     meantime.

     Use WRITE_ONCE() to prevent the compiler from making this sort of
     wrong guess:

	WRITE_ONCE(a, 0);
	... Code that does not store to variable a ...
	WRITE_ONCE(a, 0);

 (*) The compiler is within its rights to reorder memory accesses unless
     you tell it not to.  For example, consider the following interaction
     between process-level code and an interrupt handler:

	void process_level(void)
	{
		msg = get_message();
		flag = true;
	}

	void interrupt_handler(void)
	{
		if (flag)
			process_message(msg);
	}

     There is nothing to prevent the compiler from transforming
     process_level() to the following, in fact, this might well be a
     win for single-threaded code:

	void process_level(void)
	{
		flag = true;
		msg = get_message();
	}

     If the interrupt occurs between these two statement, then
     interrupt_handler() might be passed a garbled msg.  Use WRITE_ONCE()
     to prevent this as follows:

	void process_level(void)
	{
		WRITE_ONCE(msg, get_message());
		WRITE_ONCE(flag, true);
	}

	void interrupt_handler(void)
	{
		if (READ_ONCE(flag))
			process_message(READ_ONCE(msg));
	}

     Note that the READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() wrappers in
     interrupt_handler() are needed if this interrupt handler can itself
     be interrupted by something that also accesses 'flag' and 'msg',
     for example, a nested interrupt or an NMI.  Otherwise, READ_ONCE()
     and WRITE_ONCE() are not needed in interrupt_handler() other than
     for documentation purposes.  (Note also that nested interrupts
     do not typically occur in modern Linux kernels, in fact, if an
     interrupt handler returns with interrupts enabled, you will get a
     WARN_ONCE() splat.)

     You should assume that the compiler can move READ_ONCE() and
     WRITE_ONCE() past code not containing READ_ONCE(), WRITE_ONCE(),
     barrier(), or similar primitives.

     This effect could also be achieved using barrier(), but READ_ONCE()
     and WRITE_ONCE() are more selective:  With READ_ONCE() and
     WRITE_ONCE(), the compiler need only forget the contents of the
     indicated memory locations, while with barrier() the compiler must
     discard the value of all memory locations that it has currently
     cached in any machine registers.  Of course, the compiler must also
     respect the order in which the READ_ONCE()s and WRITE_ONCE()s occur,
     though the CPU of course need not do so.

 (*) The compiler is within its rights to invent stores to a variable,
     as in the following example:

	if (a)
		b = a;
	else
		b = 42;

     The compiler might save a branch by optimizing this as follows:

	b = 42;
	if (a)
		b = a;

     In single-threaded code, this is not only safe, but also saves
     a branch.  Unfortunately, in concurrent code, this optimization
     could cause some other CPU to see a spurious value of 42 -- even
     if variable 'a' was never zero -- when loading variable 'b'.
     Use WRITE_ONCE() to prevent this as follows:

	if (a)
		WRITE_ONCE(b, a);
	else
		WRITE_ONCE(b, 42);

     The compiler can also invent loads.  These are usually less
     damaging, but they can result in cache-line bouncing and thus in
     poor performance and scalability.  Use READ_ONCE() to prevent
     invented loads.

 (*) For aligned memory locations whose size allows them to be accessed
     with a single memory-reference instruction, prevents "load tearing"
     and "store tearing," in which a single large access is replaced by
     multiple smaller accesses.  For example, given an architecture having
     16-bit store instructions with 7-bit immediate fields, the compiler
     might be tempted to use two 16-bit store-immediate instructions to
     implement the following 32-bit store:

	p = 0x00010002;

     Please note that GCC really does use this sort of optimization,
     which is not surprising given that it would likely take more
     than two instructions to build the constant and then store it.
     This optimization can therefore be a win in single-threaded code.
     In fact, a recent bug (since fixed) caused GCC to incorrectly use
     this optimization in a volatile store.  In the absence of such bugs,
     use of WRITE_ONCE() prevents store tearing in the following example:

	WRITE_ONCE(p, 0x00010002);

     Use of packed structures can also result in load and store tearing,
     as in this example:

	struct __attribute__((__packed__)) foo {
		short a;
		int b;
		short c;
	};
	struct foo foo1, foo2;
	...

	foo2.a = foo1.a;
	foo2.b = foo1.b;
	foo2.c = foo1.c;

     Because there are no READ_ONCE() or WRITE_ONCE() wrappers and no
     volatile markings, the compiler would be well within its rights to
     implement these three assignment statements as a pair of 32-bit
     loads followed by a pair of 32-bit stores.  This would result in
     load tearing on 'foo1.b' and store tearing on 'foo2.b'.  READ_ONCE()
     and WRITE_ONCE() again prevent tearing in this example:

	foo2.a = foo1.a;
	WRITE_ONCE(foo2.b, READ_ONCE(foo1.b));
	foo2.c = foo1.c;

All that aside, it is never necessary to use READ_ONCE() and
WRITE_ONCE() on a variable that has been marked volatile.  For example,
because 'jiffies' is marked volatile, it is never necessary to
say READ_ONCE(jiffies).  The reason for this is that READ_ONCE() and
WRITE_ONCE() are implemented as volatile casts, which has no effect when
its argument is already marked volatile.

Please note that these compiler barriers have no direct effect on the CPU,
which may then reorder things however it wishes.


CPU MEMORY BARRIERS
-------------------

The Linux kernel has seven basic CPU memory barriers:

	TYPE			MANDATORY	SMP CONDITIONAL
	=======================	===============	===============
	GENERAL			mb()		smp_mb()
	WRITE			wmb()		smp_wmb()
	READ			rmb()		smp_rmb()
	ADDRESS DEPENDENCY			READ_ONCE()


All memory barriers except the address-dependency barriers imply a compiler
barrier.  Address dependencies do not impose any additional compiler ordering.

Aside: In the case of address dependencies, the compiler would be expected
to issue the loads in the correct order (eg. `a[b]` would have to load
the value of b before loading a[b]), however there is no guarantee in
the C specification that the compiler may not speculate the value of b
(eg. is equal to 1) and load a[b] before b (eg. tmp = a[1]; if (b != 1)
tmp = a[b]; ).  There is also the problem of a compiler reloading b after
having loaded a[b], thus having a newer copy of b than a[b].  A consensus
has not yet been reached about these problems, however the READ_ONCE()
macro is a good place to start looking.

SMP memory barriers are reduced to compiler barriers on uniprocessor compiled
systems because it is assumed that a CPU will appear to be self-consistent,
and will order overlapping accesses correctly with respect to itself.
However, see the subsection on "Virtual Machine Guests" below.

[!] Note that SMP memory barriers _must_ be used to control the ordering of
references to shared memory on SMP systems, though the use of locking instead
is sufficient.

Mandatory barriers should not be used to control SMP effects, since mandatory
barriers impose unnecessary overhead on both SMP and UP systems. They may,
however, be used to control MMIO effects on accesses through relaxed memory I/O
windows.  These barriers are required even on non-SMP systems as they affect
the order in which memory operations appear to a device by prohibiting both the
compiler and the CPU from reordering them.


There are some more advanced barrier functions:

 (*) smp_store_mb(var, value)

     This assigns the value to the variable and then inserts a full memory
     barrier after it.  It isn't guaranteed to insert anything more than a
     compiler barrier in a UP compilation.


 (*) smp_mb__before_atomic();
 (*) smp_mb__after_atomic();

     These are for use with atomic RMW functions that do not imply memory
     barriers, but where the code needs a memory barrier. Examples for atomic
     RMW functions that do not imply a memory barrier are e.g. add,
     subtract, (failed) conditional operations, _relaxed functions,
     but not atomic_read or atomic_set. A common example where a memory
     barrier may be required is when atomic ops are used for reference
     counting.

     These are also used for atomic RMW bitop functions that do not imply a
     memory barrier (such as set_bit and clear_bit).

     As an example, consider a piece of code that marks an object as being dead
     and then decrements the object's reference count:

	obj->dead = 1;
	smp_mb__before_atomic();
	atomic_dec(&obj->ref_count);

     This makes sure that the death mark on the object is perceived to be set
     *before* the reference counter is decremented.

     See Documentation/atomic_{t,bitops}.txt for more information.


 (*) dma_wmb();
 (*) dma_rmb();
 (*) dma_mb();

     These are for use with consistent memory to guarantee the ordering
     of writes or reads of shared memory accessible to both the CPU and a
     DMA capable device. See Documentation/core-api/dma-api.rst file for more
     information about consistent memory.

     For example, consider a device driver that shares memory with a device
     and uses a descriptor status value to indicate if the descriptor belongs
     to the device or the CPU, and a doorbell to notify it when new
     descriptors are available:

	if (desc->status != DEVICE_OWN) {
		/* do not read data until we own descriptor */
		dma_rmb();

		/* read/modify data */
		read_data = desc->data;
		desc->data = write_data;

		/* flush modifications before status update */
		dma_wmb();

		/* assign ownership */
		desc->status = DEVICE_OWN;

		/* Make descriptor status visible to the device followed by
		 * notify device of new descriptor
		 */
		writel(DESC_NOTIFY, doorbell);
	}

     The dma_rmb() allows us to guarantee that the device has released ownership
     before we read the data from the descriptor, and the dma_wmb() allows
     us to guarantee the data is written to the descriptor before the device
     can see it now has ownership.  The dma_mb() implies both a dma_rmb() and
     a dma_wmb().

     Note that the dma_*() barriers do not provide any ordering guarantees for
     accesses to MMIO regions.  See the later "KERNEL I/O BARRIER EFFECTS"
     subsection for more information about I/O accessors and MMIO ordering.

 (*) pmem_wmb();

     This is for use with persistent memory to ensure that stores for which
     modifications are written to persistent storage reached a platform
     durability domain.

     For example, after a non-temporal write to pmem region, we use pmem_wmb()
     to ensure that stores have reached a platform durability domain. This ensures
     that stores have updated persistent storage before any data access or
     data transfer caused by subsequent instructions is initiated. This is
     in addition to the ordering done by wmb().

     For load from persistent memory, existing read memory barriers are sufficient
     to ensure read ordering.

 (*) io_stop_wc();

     For memory accesses with write-combining attributes (e.g. those returned
     by ioremap_wc()), the CPU may wait for prior accesses to be merged with
     subsequent ones. io_stop_wc() can be used to prevent the merging of
     write-combining memory accesses before this macro with those after it when
     such wait has performance implications.

===============================
IMPLICIT KERNEL MEMORY BARRIERS
===============================

Some of the other functions in the linux kernel imply memory barriers, amongst
which are locking and scheduling functions.

This specification is a _minimum_ guarantee; any particular architecture may
provide more substantial guarantees, but these may not be relied upon outside
of arch specific code.


LOCK ACQUISITION FUNCTIONS
--------------------------

The Linux kernel has a number of locking constructs:

 (*) spin locks
 (*) R/W spin locks
 (*) mutexes
 (*) semaphores
 (*) R/W semaphores

In all cases there are variants on "ACQUIRE" operations and "RELEASE" operations
for each construct.  These operations all imply certain barriers:

 (1) ACQUIRE operation implication:

     Memory operations issued after the ACQUIRE will be completed after the
     ACQUIRE operation has completed.

     Memory operations issued before the ACQUIRE may be completed after
     the ACQUIRE operation has completed.

 (2) RELEASE operation implication:

     Memory operations issued before the RELEASE will be completed before the
     RELEASE operation has completed.

     Memory operations issued after the RELEASE may be completed before the
     RELEASE operation has completed.

 (3) ACQUIRE vs ACQUIRE implication:

     All ACQUIRE operations issued before another ACQUIRE operation will be
     completed before that ACQUIRE operation.

 (4) ACQUIRE vs RELEASE implication:

     All ACQUIRE operations issued before a RELEASE operation will be
     completed before the RELEASE operation.

 (5) Failed conditional ACQUIRE implication:

     Certain locking variants of the ACQUIRE operation may fail, either due to
     being unable to get the lock immediately, or due to receiving an unblocked
     signal while asleep waiting for the lock to become available.  Failed
     locks do not imply any sort of barrier.

[!] Note: one of the consequences of lock ACQUIREs and RELEASEs being only
one-way barriers is that the effects of instructions outside of a critical
section may seep into the inside of the critical section.

An ACQUIRE followed by a RELEASE may not be assumed to be full memory barrier
because it is possible for an access preceding the ACQUIRE to happen after the
ACQUIRE, and an access following the RELEASE to happen before the RELEASE, and
the two accesses can themselves then cross:

	*A = a;
	ACQUIRE M
	RELEASE M
	*B = b;

may occur as:

	ACQUIRE M, STORE *B, STORE *A, RELEASE M

When the ACQUIRE and RELEASE are a lock acquisition and release,
respectively, this same reordering can occur if the lock's ACQUIRE and
RELEASE are to the same lock variable, but only from the perspective of
another CPU not holding that lock.  In short, a ACQUIRE followed by an
RELEASE may -not- be assumed to be a full memory barrier.

Similarly, the reverse case of a RELEASE followed by an ACQUIRE does
not imply a full memory barrier.  Therefore, the CPU's execution of the
critical sections corresponding to the RELEASE and the ACQUIRE can cross,
so that:

	*A = a;
	RELEASE M
	ACQUIRE N
	*B = b;

could occur as:

	ACQUIRE N, STORE *B, STORE *A, RELEASE M

It might appear that this reordering could introduce a deadlock.
However, this cannot happen because if such a deadlock threatened,
the RELEASE would simply complete, thereby avoiding the deadlock.

	Why does this work?

	One key point is that we are only talking about the CPU doing
	the reordering, not the compiler.  If the compiler (or, for
	that matter, the developer) switched the operations, deadlock
	-could- occur.

	But suppose the CPU reordered the operations.  In this case,
	the unlock precedes the lock in the assembly code.  The CPU
	simply elected to try executing the later lock operation first.
	If there is a deadlock, this lock operation will simply spin (or
	try to sleep, but more on that later).	The CPU will eventually
	execute the unlock operation (which preceded the lock operation
	in the assembly code), which will unravel the potential deadlock,
	allowing the lock operation to succeed.

	But what if the lock is a sleeplock?  In that case, the code will
	try to enter the scheduler, where it will eventually encounter
	a memory barrier, which will force the earlier unlock operation
	to complete, again unraveling the deadlock.  There might be
	a sleep-unlock race, but the locking primitive needs to resolve
	such races properly in any case.

Locks and semaphores may not provide any guarantee of ordering on UP compiled
systems, and so cannot be counted on in such a situation to actually achieve
anything at all - especially with respect to I/O accesses - unless combined
with interrupt disabling operations.

See also the section on "Inter-CPU acquiring barrier effects".


As an example, consider the following:

	*A = a;
	*B = b;
	ACQUIRE
	*C = c;
	*D = d;
	RELEASE
	*E = e;
	*F = f;

The following sequence of events is acceptable:

	ACQUIRE, {*F,*A}, *E, {*C,*D}, *B, RELEASE

	[+] Note that {*F,*A} indicates a combined access.

But none of the following are:

	{*F,*A}, *B,	ACQUIRE, *C, *D,	RELEASE, *E
	*A, *B, *C,	ACQUIRE, *D,		RELEASE, *E, *F
	*A, *B,		ACQUIRE, *C,		RELEASE, *D, *E, *F
	*B,		ACQUIRE, *C, *D,	RELEASE, {*F,*A}, *E



INTERRUPT DISABLING FUNCTIONS
-----------------------------

Functions that disable interrupts (ACQUIRE equivalent) and enable interrupts
(RELEASE equivalent) will act as compiler barriers only.  So if memory or I/O
barriers are required in such a situation, they must be provided from some
other means.


SLEEP AND WAKE-UP FUNCTIONS
---------------------------

Sleeping and waking on an event flagged in global data can be viewed as an
interaction between two pieces of data: the task state of the task waiting for
the event and the global data used to indicate the event.  To make sure that
these appear to happen in the right order, the primitives to begin the process
of going to sleep, and the primitives to initiate a wake up imply certain
barriers.

Firstly, the sleeper normally follows something like this sequence of events:

	for (;;) {
		set_current_state(TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE);
		if (event_indicated)
			break;
		schedule();
	}

A general memory barrier is interpolated automatically by set_current_state()
after it has altered the task state:

	CPU 1
	===============================
	set_current_state();
	  smp_store_mb();
	    STORE current->state
	    <general barrier>
	LOAD event_indicated

set_current_state() may be wrapped by:

	prepare_to_wait();
	prepare_to_wait_exclusive();

which therefore also imply a general memory barrier after setting the state.
The whole sequence above is available in various canned forms, all of which
interpolate the memory barrier in the right place:

	wait_event();
	wait_event_interruptible();
	wait_event_interruptible_exclusive();
	wait_event_interruptible_timeout();
	wait_event_killable();
	wait_event_timeout();
	wait_on_bit();
	wait_on_bit_lock();


Secondly, code that performs a wake up normally follows something like this:

	event_indicated = 1;
	wake_up(&event_wait_queue);

or:

	event_indicated = 1;
	wake_up_process(event_daemon);

A general memory barrier is executed by wake_up() if it wakes something up.
If it doesn't wake anything up then a memory barrier may or may not be
executed; you must not rely on it.  The barrier occurs before the task state
is accessed, in particular, it sits between the STORE to indicate the event
and the STORE to set TASK_RUNNING:

	CPU 1 (Sleeper)			CPU 2 (Waker)
	===============================	===============================
	set_current_state();		STORE event_indicated
	  smp_store_mb();		wake_up();
	    STORE current->state	  ...
	    <general barrier>		  <general barrier>
	LOAD event_indicated		  if ((LOAD task->state) & TASK_NORMAL)
					    STORE task->state

where "task" is the thread being woken up and it equals CPU 1's "current".

To repeat, a general memory barrier is guaranteed to be executed by wake_up()
if something is actually awakened, but otherwise there is no such guarantee.
To see this, consider the following sequence of events, where X and Y are both
initially zero:

	CPU 1				CPU 2
	===============================	===============================
	X = 1;				Y = 1;
	smp_mb();			wake_up();
	LOAD Y				LOAD X

If a wakeup does occur, one (at least) of the two loads must see 1.  If, on
the other hand, a wakeup does not occur, both loads might see 0.

wake_up_process() always executes a general memory barrier.  The barrier again
occurs before the task state is accessed.  In particular, if the wake_up() in
the previous snippet were replaced by a call to wake_up_process() then one of
the two loads would be guaranteed to see 1.

The available waker functions include:

	complete();
	wake_up();
	wake_up_all();
	wake_up_bit();
	wake_up_interruptible();
	wake_up_interruptible_all();
	wake_up_interruptible_nr();
	wake_up_interruptible_poll();
	wake_up_interruptible_sync();
	wake_up_interruptible_sync_poll();
	wake_up_locked();
	wake_up_locked_poll();
	wake_up_nr();
	wake_up_poll();
	wake_up_process();

In terms of memory ordering, these functions all provide the same guarantees of
a wake_up() (or stronger).

[!] Note that the memory barriers implied by the sleeper and the waker do _not_
order multiple stores before the wake-up with respect to loads of those stored
values after the sleeper has called set_current_state().  For instance, if the
sleeper does:

	set_current_state(TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE);
	if (event_indicated)
		break;
	__set_current_state(TASK_RUNNING);
	do_something(my_data);

and the waker does:

	my_data = value;
	event_indicated = 1;
	wake_up(&event_wait_queue);

there's no guarantee that the change to event_indicated will be perceived by
the sleeper as coming after the change to my_data.  In such a circumstance, the
code on both sides must interpolate its own memory barriers between the
separate data accesses.  Thus the above sleeper ought to do:

	set_current_state(TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE);
	if (event_indicated) {
		smp_rmb();
		do_something(my_data);
	}

and the waker should do:

	my_data = value;
	smp_wmb();
	event_indicated = 1;
	wake_up(&event_wait_queue);


MISCELLANEOUS FUNCTIONS
-----------------------

Other functions that imply barriers:

 (*) schedule() and similar imply full memory barriers.


===================================
INTER-CPU ACQUIRING BARRIER EFFECTS
===================================

On SMP systems locking primitives give a more substantial form of barrier: one
that does affect memory access ordering on other CPUs, within the context of
conflict on any particular lock.


ACQUIRES VS MEMORY ACCESSES
---------------------------

Consider the following: the system has a pair of spinlocks (M) and (Q), and
three CPUs; then should the following sequence of events occur:

	CPU 1				CPU 2
	===============================	===============================
	WRITE_ONCE(*A, a);		WRITE_ONCE(*E, e);
	ACQUIRE M			ACQUIRE Q
	WRITE_ONCE(*B, b);		WRITE_ONCE(*F, f);
	WRITE_ONCE(*C, c);		WRITE_ONCE(*G, g);
	RELEASE M			RELEASE Q
	WRITE_ONCE(*D, d);		WRITE_ONCE(*H, h);

Then there is no guarantee as to what order CPU 3 will see the accesses to *A
through *H occur in, other than the constraints imposed by the separate locks
on the separate CPUs.  It might, for example, see:

	*E, ACQUIRE M, ACQUIRE Q, *G, *C, *F, *A, *B, RELEASE Q, *D, *H, RELEASE M

But it won't see any of:

	*B, *C or *D preceding ACQUIRE M
	*A, *B or *C following RELEASE M
	*F, *G or *H preceding ACQUIRE Q
	*E, *F or *G following RELEASE Q


=================================
WHERE ARE MEMORY BARRIERS NEEDED?
=================================

Under normal operation, memory operation reordering is generally not going to
be a problem as a single-threaded linear piece of code will still appear to
work correctly, even if it's in an SMP kernel.  There are, however, four
circumstances in which reordering definitely _could_ be a problem:

 (*) Interprocessor interaction.

 (*) Atomic operations.

 (*) Accessing devices.

 (*) Interrupts.


INTERPROCESSOR INTERACTION
--------------------------

When there's a system with more than one processor, more than one CPU in the
system may be working on the same data set at the same time.  This can cause
synchronisation problems, and the usual way of dealing with them is to use
locks.  Locks, however, are quite expensive, and so it may be preferable to
operate without the use of a lock if at all possible.  In such a case
operations that affect both CPUs may have to be carefully ordered to prevent
a malfunction.

Consider, for example, the R/W semaphore slow path.  Here a waiting process is
queued on the semaphore, by virtue of it having a piece of its stack linked to
the semaphore's list of waiting processes:

	struct rw_semaphore {
		...
		spinlock_t lock;
		struct list_head waiters;
	};

	struct rwsem_waiter {
		struct list_head list;
		struct task_struct *task;
	};

To wake up a particular waiter, the up_read() or up_write() functions have to:

 (1) read the next pointer from this waiter's record to know as to where the
     next waiter record is;

 (2) read the pointer to the waiter's task structure;

 (3) clear the task pointer to tell the waiter it has been given the semaphore;

 (4) call wake_up_process() on the task; and

 (5) release the reference held on the waiter's task struct.

In other words, it has to perform this sequence of events:

	LOAD waiter->list.next;
	LOAD waiter->task;
	STORE waiter->task;
	CALL wakeup
	RELEASE task

and if any of these steps occur out of order, then the whole thing may
malfunction.

Once it has queued itself and dropped the semaphore lock, the waiter does not
get the lock again; it instead just waits for its task pointer to be cleared
before proceeding.  Since the record is on the waiter's stack, this means that
if the task pointer is cleared _before_ the next pointer in the list is read,
another CPU might start processing the waiter and might clobber the waiter's
stack before the up*() function has a chance to read the next pointer.

Consider then what might happen to the above sequence of events:

	CPU 1				CPU 2
	===============================	===============================
					down_xxx()
					Queue waiter
					Sleep
	up_yyy()
	LOAD waiter->task;
	STORE waiter->task;
					Woken up by other event
	<preempt>
					Resume processing
					down_xxx() returns
					call foo()
					foo() clobbers *waiter
	</preempt>
	LOAD waiter->list.next;
	--- OOPS ---

This could be dealt with using the semaphore lock, but then the down_xxx()
function has to needlessly get the spinlock again after being woken up.

The way to deal with this is to insert a general SMP memory barrier:

	LOAD waiter->list.next;
	LOAD waiter->task;
	smp_mb();
	STORE waiter->task;
	CALL wakeup
	RELEASE task

In this case, the barrier makes a guarantee that all memory accesses before the
barrier will appear to happen before all the memory accesses after the barrier
with respect to the other CPUs on the system.  It does _not_ guarantee that all
the memory accesses before the barrier will be complete by the time the barrier
instruction itself is complete.

On a UP system - where this wouldn't be a problem - the smp_mb() is just a
compiler barrier, thus making sure the compiler emits the instructions in the
right order without actually intervening in the CPU.  Since there's only one
CPU, that CPU's dependency ordering logic will take care of everything else.


ATOMIC OPERATIONS
-----------------

While they are technically interprocessor interaction considerations, atomic
operations are noted specially as some of them imply full memory barriers and
some don't, but they're very heavily relied on as a group throughout the
kernel.

See Documentation/atomic_t.txt for more information.


ACCESSING DEVICES
-----------------

Many devices can be memory mapped, and so appear to the CPU as if they're just
a set of memory locations.  To control such a device, the driver usually has to
make the right memory accesses in exactly the right order.

However, having a clever CPU or a clever compiler creates a potential problem
in that the carefully sequenced accesses in the driver code won't reach the
device in the requisite order if the CPU or the compiler thinks it is more
efficient to reorder, combine or merge accesses - something that would cause
the device to malfunction.

Inside of the Linux kernel, I/O should be done through the appropriate accessor
routines - such as inb() or writel() - which know how to make such accesses
appropriately sequential.  While this, for the most part, renders the explicit
use of memory barriers unnecessary, if the accessor functions are used to refer
to an I/O memory window with relaxed memory access properties, then _mandatory_
memory barriers are required to enforce ordering.

See Documentation/driver-api/device-io.rst for more information.


INTERRUPTS
----------

A driver may be interrupted by its own interrupt service routine, and thus the
two parts of the driver may interfere with each other's attempts to control or
access the device.

This may be alleviated - at least in part - by disabling local interrupts (a
form of locking), such that the critical operations are all contained within
the interrupt-disabled section in the driver.  While the driver's interrupt
routine is executing, the driver's core may not run on the same CPU, and its
interrupt is not permitted to happen again until the current interrupt has been
handled, thus the interrupt handler does not need to lock against that.

However, consider a driver that was talking to an ethernet card that sports an
address register and a data register.  If that driver's core talks to the card
under interrupt-disablement and then the driver's interrupt handler is invoked:

	LOCAL IRQ DISABLE
	writew(ADDR, 3);
	writew(DATA, y);
	LOCAL IRQ ENABLE
	<interrupt>
	writew(ADDR, 4);
	q = readw(DATA);
	</interrupt>

The store to the data register might happen after the second store to the
address register if ordering rules are sufficiently relaxed:

	STORE *ADDR = 3, STORE *ADDR = 4, STORE *DATA = y, q = LOAD *DATA


If ordering rules are relaxed, it must be assumed that accesses done inside an
interrupt disabled section may leak outside of it and may interleave with
accesses performed in an interrupt - and vice versa - unless implicit or
explicit barriers are used.

Normally this won't be a problem because the I/O accesses done inside such
sections will include synchronous load operations on strictly ordered I/O
registers that form implicit I/O barriers.


A similar situation may occur between an interrupt routine and two routines
running on separate CPUs that communicate with each other.  If such a case is
likely, then interrupt-disabling locks should be used to guarantee ordering.


==========================
KERNEL I/O BARRIER EFFECTS
==========================

Interfacing with peripherals via I/O accesses is deeply architecture and device
specific. Therefore, drivers which are inherently non-portable may rely on
specific behaviours of their target systems in order to achieve synchronization
in the most lightweight manner possible. For drivers intending to be portable
between multiple architectures and bus implementations, the kernel offers a
series of accessor functions that provide various degrees of ordering
guarantees:

 (*) readX(), writeX():

	The readX() and writeX() MMIO accessors take a pointer to the
	peripheral being accessed as an __iomem * parameter. For pointers
	mapped with the default I/O attributes (e.g. those returned by
	ioremap()), the ordering guarantees are as follows:

	1. All readX() and writeX() accesses to the same peripheral are ordered
	   with respect to each other. This ensures that MMIO register accesses
	   by the same CPU thread to a particular device will arrive in program
	   order.

	2. A writeX() issued by a CPU thread holding a spinlock is ordered
	   before a writeX() to the same peripheral from another CPU thread
	   issued after a later acquisition of the same spinlock. This ensures
	   that MMIO register writes to a particular device issued while holding
	   a spinlock will arrive in an order consistent with acquisitions of
	   the lock.

	3. A writeX() by a CPU thread to the peripheral will first wait for the
	   completion of all prior writes to memory either issued by, or
	   propagated to, the same thread. This ensures that writes by the CPU
	   to an outbound DMA buffer allocated by dma_alloc_coherent() will be
	   visible to a DMA engine when the CPU writes to its MMIO control
	   register to trigger the transfer.

	4. A readX() by a CPU thread from the peripheral will complete before
	   any subsequent reads from memory by the same thread can begin. This
	   ensures that reads by the CPU from an incoming DMA buffer allocated
	   by dma_alloc_coherent() will not see stale data after reading from
	   the DMA engine's MMIO status register to establish that the DMA
	   transfer has completed.

	5. A readX() by a CPU thread from the peripheral will complete before
	   any subsequent delay() loop can begin execution on the same thread.
	   This ensures that two MMIO register writes by the CPU to a peripheral
	   will arrive at least 1us apart if the first write is immediately read
	   back with readX() and udelay(1) is called prior to the second
	   writeX():

		writel(42, DEVICE_REGISTER_0); // Arrives at the device...
		readl(DEVICE_REGISTER_0);
		udelay(1);
		writel(42, DEVICE_REGISTER_1); // ...at least 1us before this.

	The ordering properties of __iomem pointers obtained with non-default
	attributes (e.g. those returned by ioremap_wc()) are specific to the
	underlying architecture and therefore the guarantees listed above cannot
	generally be relied upon for accesses to these types of mappings.

 (*) readX_relaxed(), writeX_relaxed():

	These are similar to readX() and writeX(), but provide weaker memory
	ordering guarantees. Specifically, they do not guarantee ordering with
	respect to locking, normal memory accesses or delay() loops (i.e.
	bullets 2-5 above) but they are still guaranteed to be ordered with
	respect to other accesses from the same CPU thread to the same
	peripheral when operating on __iomem pointers mapped with the default
	I/O attributes.

 (*) readsX(), writesX():

	The readsX() and writesX() MMIO accessors are designed for accessing
	register-based, memory-mapped FIFOs residing on peripherals that are not
	capable of performing DMA. Consequently, they provide only the ordering
	guarantees of readX_relaxed() and writeX_relaxed(), as documented above.

 (*) inX(), outX():

	The inX() and outX() accessors are intended to access legacy port-mapped
	I/O peripherals, which may require special instructions on some
	architectures (notably x86). The port number of the peripheral being
	accessed is passed as an argument.

	Since many CPU architectures ultimately access these peripherals via an
	internal virtual memory mapping, the portable ordering guarantees
	provided by inX() and outX() are the same as those provided by readX()
	and writeX() respectively when accessing a mapping with the default I/O
	attributes.

	Device drivers may expect outX() to emit a non-posted write transaction
	that waits for a completion response from the I/O peripheral before
	returning. This is not guaranteed by all architectures and is therefore
	not part of the portable ordering semantics.

 (*) insX(), outsX():

	As above, the insX() and outsX() accessors provide the same ordering
	guarantees as readsX() and writesX() respectively when accessing a
	mapping with the default I/O attributes.

 (*) ioreadX(), iowriteX():

	These will perform appropriately for the type of access they're actually
	doing, be it inX()/outX() or readX()/writeX().

With the exception of the string accessors (insX(), outsX(), readsX() and
writesX()), all of the above assume that the underlying peripheral is
little-endian and will therefore perform byte-swapping operations on big-endian
architectures.


========================================
ASSUMED MINIMUM EXECUTION ORDERING MODEL
========================================

It has to be assumed that the conceptual CPU is weakly-ordered but that it will
maintain the appearance of program causality with respect to itself.  Some CPUs
(such as i386 or x86_64) are more constrained than others (such as powerpc or
frv), and so the most relaxed case (namely DEC Alpha) must be assumed outside
of arch-specific code.

This means that it must be considered that the CPU will execute its instruction
stream in any order it feels like - or even in parallel - provided that if an
instruction in the stream depends on an earlier instruction, then that
earlier instruction must be sufficiently complete[*] before the later
instruction may proceed; in other words: provided that the appearance of
causality is maintained.

 [*] Some instructions have more than one effect - such as changing the
     condition codes, changing registers or changing memory - and different
     instructions may depend on different effects.

A CPU may also discard any instruction sequence that winds up having no
ultimate effect.  For example, if two adjacent instructions both load an
immediate value into the same register, the first may be discarded.


Similarly, it has to be assumed that compiler might reorder the instruction
stream in any way it sees fit, again provided the appearance of causality is
maintained.


============================
THE EFFECTS OF THE CPU CACHE
============================

The way cached memory operations are perceived across the system is affected to
a certain extent by the caches that lie between CPUs and memory, and by the
memory coherence system that maintains the consistency of state in the system.

As far as the way a CPU interacts with another part of the system through the
caches goes, the memory system has to include the CPU's caches, and memory
barriers for the most part act at the interface between the CPU and its cache
(memory barriers logically act on the dotted line in the following diagram):

	    <--- CPU --->         :       <----------- Memory ----------->
	                          :
	+--------+    +--------+  :   +--------+    +-----------+
	|        |    |        |  :   |        |    |           |    +--------+
	|  CPU   |    | Memory |  :   | CPU    |    |           |    |        |
	|  Core  |--->| Access |----->| Cache  |<-->|           |    |        |
	|        |    | Queue  |  :   |        |    |           |--->| Memory |
	|        |    |        |  :   |        |    |           |    |        |
	+--------+    +--------+  :   +--------+    |           |    |        |
	                          :                 | Cache     |    +--------+
	                          :                 | Coherency |
	                          :                 | Mechanism |    +--------+
	+--------+    +--------+  :   +--------+    |           |    |	      |
	|        |    |        |  :   |        |    |           |    |        |
	|  CPU   |    | Memory |  :   | CPU    |    |           |--->| Device |
	|  Core  |--->| Access |----->| Cache  |<-->|           |    |        |
	|        |    | Queue  |  :   |        |    |           |    |        |
	|        |    |        |  :   |        |    |           |    +--------+
	+--------+    +--------+  :   +--------+    +-----------+
	                          :
	                          :

Although any particular load or store may not actually appear outside of the
CPU that issued it since it may have been satisfied within the CPU's own cache,
it will still appear as if the full memory access had taken place as far as the
other CPUs are concerned since the cache coherency mechanisms will migrate the
cacheline over to the accessing CPU and propagate the effects upon conflict.

The CPU core may execute instructions in any order it deems fit, provided the
expected program causality appears to be maintained.  Some of the instructions
generate load and store operations which then go into the queue of memory
accesses to be performed.  The core may place these in the queue in any order
it wishes, and continue execution until it is forced to wait for an instruction
to complete.

What memory barriers are concerned with is controlling the order in which
accesses cross from the CPU side of things to the memory side of things, and
the order in which the effects are perceived to happen by the other observers
in the system.

[!] Memory barriers are _not_ needed within a given CPU, as CPUs always see
their own loads and stores as if they had happened in program order.

[!] MMIO or other device accesses may bypass the cache system.  This depends on
the properties of the memory window through which devices are accessed and/or
the use of any special device communication instructions the CPU may have.


CACHE COHERENCY VS DMA
----------------------

Not all systems maintain cache coherency with respect to devices doing DMA.  In
such cases, a device attempting DMA may obtain stale data from RAM because
dirty cache lines may be resident in the caches of various CPUs, and may not
have been written back to RAM yet.  To deal with this, the appropriate part of
the kernel must flush the overlapping bits of cache on each CPU (and maybe
invalidate them as well).

In addition, the data DMA'd to RAM by a device may be overwritten by dirty
cache lines being written back to RAM from a CPU's cache after the device has
installed its own data, or cache lines present in the CPU's cache may simply
obscure the fact that RAM has been updated, until at such time as the cacheline
is discarded from the CPU's cache and reloaded.  To deal with this, the
appropriate part of the kernel must invalidate the overlapping bits of the
cache on each CPU.

See Documentation/core-api/cachetlb.rst for more information on cache
management.


CACHE COHERENCY VS MMIO
-----------------------

Memory mapped I/O usually takes place through memory locations that are part of
a window in the CPU's memory space that has different properties assigned than
the usual RAM directed window.

Amongst these properties is usually the fact that such accesses bypass the
caching entirely and go directly to the device buses.  This means MMIO accesses
may, in effect, overtake accesses to cached memory that were emitted earlier.
A memory barrier isn't sufficient in such a case, but rather the cache must be
flushed between the cached memory write and the MMIO access if the two are in
any way dependent.


=========================
THE THINGS CPUS GET UP TO
=========================

A programmer might take it for granted that the CPU will perform memory
operations in exactly the order specified, so that if the CPU is, for example,
given the following piece of code to execute:

	a = READ_ONCE(*A);
	WRITE_ONCE(*B, b);
	c = READ_ONCE(*C);
	d = READ_ONCE(*D);
	WRITE_ONCE(*E, e);

they would then expect that the CPU will complete the memory operation for each
instruction before moving on to the next one, leading to a definite sequence of
operations as seen by external observers in the system:

	LOAD *A, STORE *B, LOAD *C, LOAD *D, STORE *E.


Reality is, of course, much messier.  With many CPUs and compilers, the above
assumption doesn't hold because:

 (*) loads are more likely to need to be completed immediately to permit
     execution progress, whereas stores can often be deferred without a
     problem;

 (*) loads may be done speculatively, and the result discarded should it prove
     to have been unnecessary;

 (*) loads may be done speculatively, leading to the result having been fetched
     at the wrong time in the expected sequence of events;

 (*) the order of the memory accesses may be rearranged to promote better use
     of the CPU buses and caches;

 (*) loads and stores may be combined to improve performance when talking to
     memory or I/O hardware that can do batched accesses of adjacent locations,
     thus cutting down on transaction setup costs (memory and PCI devices may
     both be able to do this); and

 (*) the CPU's data cache may affect the ordering, and while cache-coherency
     mechanisms may alleviate this - once the store has actually hit the cache
     - there's no guarantee that the coherency management will be propagated in
     order to other CPUs.

So what another CPU, say, might actually observe from the above piece of code
is:

	LOAD *A, ..., LOAD {*C,*D}, STORE *E, STORE *B

	(Where "LOAD {*C,*D}" is a combined load)


However, it is guaranteed that a CPU will be self-consistent: it will see its
_own_ accesses appear to be correctly ordered, without the need for a memory
barrier.  For instance with the following code:

	U = READ_ONCE(*A);
	WRITE_ONCE(*A, V);
	WRITE_ONCE(*A, W);
	X = READ_ONCE(*A);
	WRITE_ONCE(*A, Y);
	Z = READ_ONCE(*A);

and assuming no intervention by an external influence, it can be assumed that
the final result will appear to be:

	U == the original value of *A
	X == W
	Z == Y
	*A == Y

The code above may cause the CPU to generate the full sequence of memory
accesses:

	U=LOAD *A, STORE *A=V, STORE *A=W, X=LOAD *A, STORE *A=Y, Z=LOAD *A

in that order, but, without intervention, the sequence may have almost any
combination of elements combined or discarded, provided the program's view
of the world remains consistent.  Note that READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE()
are -not- optional in the above example, as there are architectures
where a given CPU might reorder successive loads to the same location.
On such architectures, READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() do whatever is
necessary to prevent this, for example, on Itanium the volatile casts
used by READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE() cause GCC to emit the special ld.acq
and st.rel instructions (respectively) that prevent such reordering.

The compiler may also combine, discard or defer elements of the sequence before
the CPU even sees them.

For instance:

	*A = V;
	*A = W;

may be reduced to:

	*A = W;

since, without either a write barrier or an WRITE_ONCE(), it can be
assumed that the effect of the storage of V to *A is lost.  Similarly:

	*A = Y;
	Z = *A;

may, without a memory barrier or an READ_ONCE() and WRITE_ONCE(), be
reduced to:

	*A = Y;
	Z = Y;

and the LOAD operation never appear outside of the CPU.


AND THEN THERE'S THE ALPHA
--------------------------

The DEC Alpha CPU is one of the most relaxed CPUs there is.  Not only that,
some versions of the Alpha CPU have a split data cache, permitting them to have
two semantically-related cache lines updated at separate times.  This is where
the address-dependency barrier really becomes necessary as this synchronises
both caches with the memory coherence system, thus making it seem like pointer
changes vs new data occur in the right order.

The Alpha defines the Linux kernel's memory model, although as of v4.15
the Linux kernel's addition of smp_mb() to READ_ONCE() on Alpha greatly
reduced its impact on the memory model.


VIRTUAL MACHINE GUESTS
----------------------

Guests running within virtual machines might be affected by SMP effects even if
the guest itself is compiled without SMP support.  This is an artifact of
interfacing with an SMP host while running an UP kernel.  Using mandatory
barriers for this use-case would be possible but is often suboptimal.

To handle this case optimally, low-level virt_mb() etc macros are available.
These have the same effect as smp_mb() etc when SMP is enabled, but generate
identical code for SMP and non-SMP systems.  For example, virtual machine guests
should use virt_mb() rather than smp_mb() when synchronizing against a
(possibly SMP) host.

These are equivalent to smp_mb() etc counterparts in all other respects,
in particular, they do not control MMIO effects: to control
MMIO effects, use mandatory barriers.


============
EXAMPLE USES
============

CIRCULAR BUFFERS
----------------

Memory barriers can be used to implement circular buffering without the need
of a lock to serialise the producer with the consumer.  See:

	Documentation/core-api/circular-buffers.rst

for details.


==========
REFERENCES
==========

Alpha AXP Architecture Reference Manual, Second Edition (Sites & Witek,
Digital Press)
	Chapter 5.2: Physical Address Space Characteristics
	Chapter 5.4: Caches and Write Buffers
	Chapter 5.5: Data Sharing
	Chapter 5.6: Read/Write Ordering

AMD64 Architecture Programmer's Manual Volume 2: System Programming
	Chapter 7.1: Memory-Access Ordering
	Chapter 7.4: Buffering and Combining Memory Writes

ARM Architecture Reference Manual (ARMv8, for ARMv8-A architecture profile)
	Chapter B2: The AArch64 Application Level Memory Model

IA-32 Intel Architecture Software Developer's Manual, Volume 3:
System Programming Guide
	Chapter 7.1: Locked Atomic Operations
	Chapter 7.2: Memory Ordering
	Chapter 7.4: Serializing Instructions

The SPARC Architecture Manual, Version 9
	Chapter 8: Memory Models
	Appendix D: Formal Specification of the Memory Models
	Appendix J: Programming with the Memory Models

Storage in the PowerPC (Stone and Fitzgerald)

UltraSPARC Programmer Reference Manual
	Chapter 5: Memory Accesses and Cacheability
	Chapter 15: Sparc-V9 Memory Models

UltraSPARC III Cu User's Manual
	Chapter 9: Memory Models

UltraSPARC IIIi Processor User's Manual
	Chapter 8: Memory Models

UltraSPARC Architecture 2005
	Chapter 9: Memory
	Appendix D: Formal Specifications of the Memory Models

UltraSPARC T1 Supplement to the UltraSPARC Architecture 2005
	Chapter 8: Memory Models
	Appendix F: Caches and Cache Coherency

Solaris Internals, Core Kernel Architecture, p63-68:
	Chapter 3.3: Hardware Considerations for Locks and
			Synchronization

Unix Systems for Modern Architectures, Symmetric Multiprocessing and Caching
for Kernel Programmers:
	Chapter 13: Other Memory Models

Intel Itanium Architecture Software Developer's Manual: Volume 1:
	Section 2.6: Speculation
	Section 4.4: Memory Access
