HUMAN ACTION
A Treatise on Economics
BY

LUDWIG VON MISES

LUDWIG VON MISES INSTITUTE
AUBURN, ALABAMA

The Ludwig von Mises Institute gratefully dedicates this
restored Human Action to all its Members who aided in this
historic project, and in particular to the following Patrons:
Mark M. Adamo
Thomas K Armstrong

TneAmmng Foundation
Richard B. Bleiberg
Dr. John Bratland
Jerome V. Bmni
The Bwni Foundation
Sir John and Lady Dalhoff
JohnW. Deming
John A. Halter
Mary and George Dewitt Jacob
The Kealiher Family
William Lowndes, 111
Ronald Mandle
Ellice McDonald, Jr., CBE, and Rosa Laird McDonald, CBE
W i i m W. Massey, Jr.
Joseph Edward Paul Melville
Roger Miliken
Richard W. Pooley, MD
Sheldon Rose
Gary G. Schlarbaum
Conrad Schneiker
Loronzo H. and Margaret C. Thornson
Quinten E. and Marian L. Ward
Keith S. Wood

The Ludwig von Mises Institute thanks Bettina Bien Greaves for permission to reissue
the first edition of Human Action.
Copyright O 1998 by Bettina Bien Greaves
Introduction Copyright O 1998 by The Ludwig von Mies Institute
Produced and published by The Ludwig von Mises Institute, 518 West Magnolia
Avenue, Auburn, Alabama 36832, (334) 844-2500; fax (334) 844-2583;
mail@mises.org;www.mises.org

All rights reserved.
ISBN 0-94546624-2

INTRODUCTION^
T O THE SCHOLAR'S EDITION

0

NCE in a great while, a book appears that both embodies and

dramatically extends centuries of accumulated wisdom in a
particular discipline, and, at the same time, radically challenges the
intellectual and political consensus of the day. Human Action by
Ludwigvon ~Mises(1881-1973) is such a book, and more: a comprehensive treatise on economic science that would lay the foundation
for a massive shift in intellectual opinion that is still working itself
out fifty years after publication. Not even such milestones in the
history of economic thought as Adam Smith's Wealth ofNations,
Alfred Marshall's Principles, Karl Marx's Capital, or John Maynard
Keynes's General The09 can be said to have such enduring significance and embody such persuasive power that today's students and
scholars, as much as those who read it when it first appeared, are
so fully drawn into the author's way of thinking. For this reason,
and others discussed below, this Scholar's Edition is the original
1949 magnum opus that represents such a critical turning point in
the history of ideas, reproduced (with a 1954 index produced by
Vernelia Crawford) for the fiftieth anniversary of its initial appearance.
When Human Action first appeared, its distinctive Austrian
SchooI approach was already considered a closed chapter in the
history of thought. First, its monetary and business cycle theory,
pioneered by Mises in 1912' and extended and applied in the 1920s
and 193O S , ~had been buried by the appearance of Keynes's General
1. T h e archives a t Yale University Press, Grove City College, and the
Ludwig von Mises Institute provided source material.
2. The Theory ofMonqand Credit, trans. by H.E. Batson (Indianapolis, Ind.:
Liberty Classics, [19 121 1980).
3. Essays can be found in On the Manipulation ofMonq and Credit, trans.
by Bettina Bien Greaves (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Free Market Books, 1978).

vi

Human Action

Theory, which gave a facile but appealing explanation of the lingering
global depression. Second, Mises's 1920 demonstration that a socialist
economy was incapable of rational economic calculation4sparked a
long debate in which the "market socialists" had been widely
perceived to be the eventual victors5 (in part because it became a
debate among Walrasians6).Third, and fatal for the theoretical core
of the Austrian School, was the displacement of its theory of price,
as originated by Carl Menger in 1871' and elaborated upon by Eugen
von Bohm-Bawerk, John Bates Clark, Philip H. Wicksteed, Frankk
Another strain had begun to
Fetter, and Herbert J. D a ~ e n ~ o r t . ~
develop along the lines spelled out by Menger's other student
Friedrich von Wieser, who followed the Walrasian path of developing price theory within the framework of general equilibrium.
Wieser was the primary influence on two members of the third
generation of the Austrian School, Hans Mayer and Joseph A.
~chum~eter.'
Members of the fourth generation, including Oskar Lhlorgenstern,
Gottfi-ied von Haberler, Fritz Machlup, and Friedrich k von Hayek,
also tended to follow the Wieserian approach. T h e crucial influence on this generation had been Schurnpeter's treatise Das Wesen
und der Hauptinhalt dm Theoretischen Nationalokonomie, published in
4. Economic Cakulation in the Socialist Commonwealth, trans. by S. Adler
(Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, [I9201 1990).
5. Trygve J.B. Hoff, E c m i c Cahhtion in the Socialist Sociq, trans. by M A
Michael (Indianapolis, Ind.: Liberty Press, [I9491 1981).
6. Murray N. Rothbard, "The End of Socialism and the Calculation
Debate Revisited," Review ofAustrian Economics, 5, no. 2 (1991), 51-76.
7. Carl Menger. Principles ofEconmics. trans. by James D i n p a l l N e w
York: New York University Press, [I8711 1976).
8. Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk, "Grundziige der Theorie des winschaftlichen
Giiterwertes," Jahrhiichw @ r Nationaliikonmie und Statistik 13 (1886), 1-82,
477-541; John Bates Clark, The Dirtribution of Wealth: A Theory of Wages,
Interest, and Profits (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, [I8991 1965); Philip H.
Wicksteed, The Alphabet ofEconmic Sense, Pt. I: Elements of the Theory of Value
or Worth (London: Macmillan, 1888); Frank A. Fetter, Eonomic Principler
(New York: T h e Century Co., 1915); Herbert J. Davenport, The Economics of
Enterprise (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, [I9131 1968).
9. T h e two economists for whom Schumpeter felt the "closest affinity"
were Walras and Wieser; see Fritz Machlup, "Joseph Schumpeter's
Economic Methodology," in idem., Methodology of Economics and Other Social
Sciences (New York: Academic Press, 1978), p. 462.

Introduction to the Scholar's Edition

vii

1908."This bookwas a general treatment ofthe methodological and
theoretical issues of price theory from a Walrasian perspective. Apart
from Wieser's writings, it was the only "Austrian" workofpure theory
to appear prior to Mises's Nationalokonomie, the German-language
predecessor to Human Action. For the young economists studying
in Vienna, and despite criticisms by Bohrn-Bawerk, Schumpeter's
book became a guide to the future of the science. As Morgenstern said,
"the work was read avidly in Vienna even long after the First World
War, and its youthful freshness and vigor appealed to the young
students.... [Llike many others in my generation I resolved to read
everything Schumpeter had written and would ever write.""
After Bohm-Bawerk's death in 1914, no full-time faculty member
at the University of Vienna was working stricdy within a Mengerian
framework, while Mises's status as a Privatdozent diminished his
academic standing. Prior to the geographical dispersal of the school
in the mid-1930s,12moreover, none of the members of these latter
generations had achieved international recognition, particularly
among English-speaking economists, on the order of Bohm-Bawerk. After the retirement of Clark, Wicksteed, Fetter, and Davenport
from the debate on pure theory by 1920, the School's influence on
the mainstream of Anglo-American economics declined precipitously. This left the field of high theory, particularly in the United
States, completely open to a Marshallian ascendancy.
In Germany, the long night of domination by the anti-theoretical German Historical School was coming to an end, but the book
that reawakened the theoretical curiosityof German economistsafter
the First World War was Gustav Cassel's Theoretische Sozialokonomie,
which offered a verbal rendition of Walrasian price theory.13 In the
Romance countries of France and Italy, Mengerian price theory never
10. Schumpeter's translation of the title: The hTatzlreand b m c e of Theoretical
Econumics(Munichand Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1908). This book coins
the phrase "methodological individualism."
11. SelectedEconomicWritingsofOskarMmgenstern,ed. Andrew Schotter (New
York: New York University Press, 1976), p. 196.
12. Earlene Craver, "The Emigration of ,4ustrian Economists," Histoly of
Political Economy, 18 (Spring 1987), 1-3 0.
13. Gustav Cassel, The Theory ofsocial Economy (2d ed. New York Harcourt,
Bracc and Company, 1932). As Mises wrote, "The decade-long neglect of
theoretical studies had led to the remarkable result that the German public

...

vlu

Human Action

achieved a firm foothold and, by the 1920s, it had been shunted
aside by the Lausanne School and Marshallian-style neoclassicism.
By the rnid- 193Os, the Austrian School had melted away in Ausma as
more attractive prospects abroad or the looming National Socialist
threat drove the leading Austrian economists to emigrate to Great
Britain (Hayek), the United States (Machlup, Haberler, and LMorgenstern),and Switzerland (Mises). Hayek was well positioned to spark
a revival of Mengerian theory in Great Britain, but having been a
student of Wieser rather than ~ i i h m - ~ a w e r k , '
he~ saw the core of
economics as the "pure logic of choice," which could be represented
by the timeless equations of general equilibrium.15In the end,
Walrasian general equilibrium theory was imported into Great
Britain by John R. Hicks under Hayek's influence.'"
In addition, analytical deficiencies internal to the pre-Misesian
approach contributed to the sharp decline of the Austrian School
after the First World War. T h e Austrians themselves lacked the
analyucal wherewithal to demonstrate that the timeless and moneyless general equilibrium approach and the one-at-a-time Marshallian approach-the
analytical pyrotechnics of the 1930s
notwithstanding-are both plainly and profoundly irrelevant to a
must look to a foreigner, the Swede Gustav Cassel, for a principled explanation
of the problems of economic life." Ludwig von Mises, "Carl Menger and the
Austrian School of Economics," Azmian Economire An Antholo , ed. Bettina
Bien Greaves Qrvington-on-EIudsoi~, N.Y.: Foundation or Economic
Education, 1996), p. 52.
14. Hayek himself explicitly distinguished between "the two original
branches of the Austrian School," the Bohm-Bawerkian and the Wieserian,
and characterized himself as an adherent of the latter branch. See F.A. Hayek,
"Coping with Ignorance" in idem, Knowledge, Evolution, and Society (London:
Adam Smith Institute, 1983), pp. 17-18; and The Collected Works of F.A.
Hayek, vol. 4: The Fortunes o Liberalism: Ersays on Awwian Economics and the
Ideal of Freedom, ed. Peter
Klein (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1992), p. 157.
15. See F A Hayek, "Economics and Knowledge," in idem, Individmlljrn and
LGonmic Ordw (Chicago: Henry Regnery Company, [I9481 1972),pp. 33-56.
16. See Bruna Ingrao and Giorgio Israel, The Invkible Hand: Economic
&ilibrium in the Hhory $Science (Boston: M I T Press, 1990), for a perceptive
description of Hayek's crucial role in the early development of the
Anglo-American version of general equilibrium theory (pp. 232-235). Hayek
himself regarded the analysis of value theory in Hick's Valueand Capital in terms
of marginal rates of substitution and indifference curves as "the ultimate
statement of more than a half a century's discussion in the tradition of the
Austrian School." The Fortunes of LiberalIjm, pp. 53-54.

P

cf

Introduction to the Scholar-'sEdition

ix

central problem of economic theory: explaining how monetary
exchange gives rise to the processes of economic calculation that are
essential to rational resource allocation in a dynamic world." Thus,
after a period of remarkable development and influence from 1871
to 1914, by the early 1930s the Austrian School was on the edge of
extinction.
Mises was fully cognizant of this unfortunate state of affairs
when he emigrated to Switzerland in 1934. Ensconced at the
Graduate Institute of International Studies in Geneva, for the first
time he could fully focus his attention on academic research. Mises
used this opportunity to write Nntionalokonmie, a book that intended to revive the Mengerian approach and elaborate it into a
complete and unified system. As evidence of the importance that
Mises attached to this book, and of the time and energy he poured
into it, he wrote very little else in the years leading up to its
publication in 1940. Previously an enormously prolific writer, the
extent of his output from 1934 to 1939 was comparatively meager:
in addition to book reviews, short memos, newspaper and magazine articles, notes, and introductions, there was only one substantial article for an academic audience.18
Retrospectively describing his purpose in writing XatimaZokonomie, Mises left no doubt that he sought to address the two burning
issues left unresolved by the founders of the Austrian School: the
status of the equilibrium construct and the bifurcation of monetary
and value theory. "I try in my treatise," Mises wrote, "to consider
the concept of static equilibrium as instrumental only and to make
use of this purely hypothetical abstraction only as a means of approaching an understanding of a continuously changing world.""
Regarding his effort to incorporate money into the older Austrian
theoretical system, - i s e s identified his immediate inspiration as his
17. See Joseph T. Salerno, "The Place of Human Action in the History of
Economic 'Thought," Quarterly3oumal ofAwtrian Economics, 2, no. I (1999).
18. See Bettina Bien Greaves and Robert W. McGee, comps., Mises: An
Annotated Biblio apby (Inington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic
Education, 1 9 6 , pp. 4 1 4 1 , for a listing of Mires's published and
unpublished writings in these years.
19. Y/Iv Contributions to Economic Theory," in Mises, Planning fur
Freedom and Sixteen Other fisays and Addruses (4th cd. South Holland, 111.:
Libertarian Press, 1980), pp. 2 3 0-23 1.

Human Action

x

opponents in the socialist calculation debate of the 1930s. These
economic theorists, under the influence of the general equilibrium
approach, advocated the mathematical solution to the problem of
socialist calculation. As Mises argued: "They failed to see the very
first challenge: How can economic action that always consists of
preferring and setting aside, that is, of making unequal valuations,
be transformed into equal valuations, and the use of equations?'do
But without an adequate theory of monetary calculation, which
ultimately rests upon a unified theory of a money-exchange economy, Mises realized that there could be no definitive refutation of
the socialist position. Accordingly, Mises revealed: "LVationalokonomie finally afforded me the opportunity to present the problems
of economic calculation in their full significance.... I had merged
the theory of indirect exchange with that of direct exchange into
a coherent system of human a~tion."~'
Thus, Nationalb2onomie marked the culmination of the Austrian
theoretical approach, and, in a real sense, the rebirth of the
Austrian SchooI of economics. It was designed to play a decisive
role in reconstructing the whole of economic science in its moment
of crisis, including reformulating and unifylng price theory, monetary theory, and business cycle theory, and at the same time
establishing the correct methodological foundations of the social
sciences. Using this mighty architectonic of economic theory,
Mises formulated a radical and impermeable defense of laissezfaire policy conclusions that were distinctly unfashionable when
the book first appeared.

M

ISES was uniquely prepared to undertake such a radical task

Beginning in 1912, during a long tenure as economic advisor
and chief economist of the Vienna Chamber of Commerce, Mises
produced a steady stream of works in economic and political
theory. T h e publication of his first treatise, Theorie des Geldes und
20. Notes and Recolkctim, trans. by Hans F. Sennholz (South Holland, Ill.:
Libertarian Press, 1978), p. 112.
2 1. Ibid.

Introdzlttiim to the Scholar's Edition

xi

der Umlaufmittel(19 12) was followed by Nation, Staat und Wirtschafi (19 19), Die Gemeinwirtschaf2 (1 922), Liberalismw (192 7),
Geldwertstabilisierzlngand Konjunktulpolitik (192 €9,Kritik des Interventionism~(1929), and Grundprobleme der Nationaliikonomie
(1933).*' Among the professional public, these works earned Mises a
reputation as a leading monetary theorist and defender of the gold
standard, and as an outstanding critic of socialism and proponent of
laissez-faire capitalism. In academia, he was also recognized as the
heir to the intellectual tradition of ~Mengerand Bohrn-Bawerk, and
a leading defender of the deductive method in the social sciences
against the claims of historicists. However, outside the circle of the
participants in his Privatsmina7; the ('Misq-Ki-eis,''j the philosophical
depth and systematic breadth of Mises's work was rarely acknowledged or recognized. Even his students and friends, who beginning
in 1920 met regularly every two weeks in his Chamber of Commerce office, had at best only an inkling of ,Wses's systematic
ambition. From book to book, they witnessed the appearance of the
successive building blocks of a Misesian system. But when Mises left
Vienna in 1934 to move to Geneva, even they could not have had
more than a vague notion of how to fit these pieces into a unified
whole. Mises was fifty-eight years old when Nationalbkonomie:
appeared. I t was Mises's
Theorie des Handelm and Wirts~haftens~~
crowning intellectual achievement and the sum of his scholarly
life. At long last, this book should have established him as the
foremost German-language economist and social theorist of his
generation.
22. The Theory $Money and Credit; Nation, State, and Economy, trans. by
Leland B. Yeager (New York: New York University Press, [I9191 1983);
Socialism: An Economic and SocioIopcalAm&sk,trans. by J. Kahane (Indianapolis,
Ind.: Liberty Classics, [I9221 1981); Liberah:In the CWTr*,
trans. by
Ralph Raico (lrvmgton-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education,
[I9271 1985); "Monetary Stabilization and Cyclical Policy," in Mises, On the
Manipulation of Monq and Credit; A Critique of Internentionism, trans. by
Hans F. Sennholz (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, [I9291 1977);
EpistemologicalProblems of Economics, trans. by George Reisman (New York:
New York University Press, [I9331 1976).
23. Which included such outstanding scholars as Gotdried von Haberler,
F.A. Hayek, Felix Kaufmann, Fritz Machlup, Oskar Morgenstern, Paul N.
Rosenstein-Rodan, Alfred Schiitz, Richard von Strigl, and Erich VoegeIin.
24. (Munich: Philosophia Verlag, [I9401 1980).

xii

Human Action

Mises's masterwork, however, appeared in the midst of political and
personal crisis. After the Anscblzlss on March 12, 1938, Mises could
no longer travel to Austria. His apartment in Vienna had been
ransacked by National Socialists and his library and personal papers
c~nfiscated.~'
By June 1940, German troops had virtually encircled
Switzerland, and, urged by his wife, Mises decided to leave Geneva
and emigrate to the United States. "I could no longer bear," he
explained in his Erinnmngen written shortly after his arrival in New
York City on August 4, 1940, "to live in a country that regarded
my presence as a political burden and danger to its security."26
From the outset, the book was cut off almost completely from
the German market, and its Swiss publisher would become one of
the countless economic casualties of war. Meanwhile, almost all
members of the former Afises-kieis had likewise left Austria and
emigrated to other countries. In their new, foreign, and uncertain
environment, they paid little or no attention to it. Thus, Nationalokonomie remained virtually unread." What should have been a
moment of immense satisfaction and even triumph, a moment
which might have brought about a shift away from the growing
~e~nesiadWalrasian-~arshallian
consensus, and even inoculated the profession against the positivist onslaught of later decades, became for LI/Iisesa moment of tragedy and likely the lowest
point in his career.
Nine more years would pass until, with the publication of
Human Action, Mises would reap some of the rewards that had
2 5. Long thou ht to be lost,the paperswere rediscoveredin 1991in a formerly
secret Soviet arckve in Moscow. The initial discoverers were two German
fonn&&fi;
see G6tzxjr
researchers assGc-a:ed -$iL$ a Gem-,n !-,boi ufiion
and Susanne Hein, DaszentraleStaatsarcbivin Moskau (Diisseldorf, Germany:
Hans-Blijckler-Stiftung, 1993). Following up on their workwere,two Austrian
historians Gerhard Jagschitz and Stefan Karner, Beuteakten aur Osterreicb: D m
Ostmeichbestand im W c h e n "Sondm-archiv" Moskau (Graz, Austria: Ludwig
Boltzmann-Institut, 1996).
26. I s e s ' s Erinnerclngen was published posthumously (Stuttgart, Germany:
Gustav Fischer, 1978), p. 88; translated as Notes and Recollections.
27. Only two members ofthe formerMises-fieisreviewed the book, Hayek
(Economic Journal, April 1941) and Walter Sulzbach (Journal of Social
Philosophy andJurisprudence, October 1941). Greaves and McGee, Mises: An
Annotated Bibliography, list only two other reviews, one by Hans Honegger in
a Swiss newspaper, and the other by Frank H. Knight (Economica, November
1941).

Introduction to the Scholar's Edition

...

xlll

escaped him in 1940.~'Yale University Press, headed by Eugene
Davidson, had published Mises's Omnipotent Government and Bureaucracy in 1944, on the recommendation of Henry Hazlitt, who
was then working for the New York Times as an editorial writer. The
success of these works prompted Davidson to send a note to Mises
in mid-November that would set the process in motion. Mises and
Davidson met on Monday, December 4, at the Roosevelt Hotel
for lunch, and made plans for a translation of Nationalokonornie,
under the working title Treatise in Economics. Davidson found the
idea enticing and solicited further opinions on the matter from a
variety of economists and public figures.
Hazlitt recommended immediate publication, as did John V.
Van Sickle of Vanderbilt University ("I hope you will decide on
publication"*^, Ray Bert Westerfield of Yale University ("a firstrate bookn3?,Hayek ("the general standard of the workis of a kind
that it will do credit to any University Pressn3'),and Machlup (who,
with effusive praise for Mises, encouraged Davidson to ignore all
protests against publication; any book "out of sympathy with the
New Deal in economics" would be opposed by the same people'2).
Haberler, however, wrote, "It is a little embarrassing for me to
answer your question because Professor Mises is a good friend of
mine. Please do keep the contents of this letter strictly confidential.
The book you are considering for translation is a very big one. It
contains Professor Mises's life work in economics. It is well written
and interesting but I must say for my taste it is very extreme, and
I am pretty sure it will not be well accepted in academic quarters....
May I suggest that you ask Professor Knight of the University of
Chicago for his opinion?"33
28. As the result of the continued success of Human Action, forty years
after its initial publication Mises's Natimliikmumie was reprinted (Munich:
Philosophia, 1980). Unlike the original, the reprint received widespread
attention, includingreviews in the two leadin German language newspapers,
the Frankfirter All emeine Zeitung (by Wilhe m Seuss) and the Neue Zuercher
Zeimng (by Egon 'fuchtfeldt).
29. Private correspondence to Eugene Davidson, February 12,1945.
30. Private correspondence to Eugene Davidson, February 13, 1945.
31. Private correspondence to Eugene Davidson, March 3,1945.
32. Private correspondence to Eugene Davidson, February 22,1945.
3 3. Private correspondence to Eugene Davidson, January 23, 1945.

7

xiv

Human Action

Yale then consulted Frank H. Knight, who wrote back that Mises
is "no doubt the last of the great Austrian or Viennese school, since
other members of comparable standing turned their scientific along
with their political coats, if they did not leave Ausaia and Germany,
and started work on new problems under new auspices.... It is my
impression-not based on adequate knowledgethat the author's
views on monetary and cycle problems are more important than those
on general theory." In an addendum,Knight says he in turn consulted
Oskar Lange (one of Mises's leading opponents in the socialist
calculation debate) who was "surely not more in favor of the project.
He thinks vonMises did some pioneering at one time in the monetary
addition,
I n B.H.
field but that is old and long available in ~ n ~ l i s h . " ~ ~
Beckhart, a former student of Mises's teaching at Columbia University, wrote a terse reply to Davidson: "I doubt if Professor Mises's work
would have a sufficiently wide sale to justify its translation or publication. Professor Mises's theories are developed rather fully in his
works which have already appeared in English."35
Despite the protests, Yale's Committee on Publications voted to
approve the publication March 5, 1945, under the working title
National Economy, which would become Human Action just prior
to publication.36The publisher received the final manuscript on
October 1,1948.By the time the English-language version appeared,
circumstances were no longer conducive to an early renewal of the
Austrian School. ~ e a d e r s h iin~pure economic theory had passed
from Europe to the United States, in part because of the migration
of many Central European economiststo America. Marshallian price
theory in various forms had dominated the textbook literature and
undergraduate teaching in the United States since the 1920s, and this
dominance was strengthenedby the widespread interest in the doctrine
of imperfect competition in the journals. In addition, the general
equilibrium approach had secured a firm foothold in the United
34. Private correspondence to Eugene Davidson, January 29, 1945.
35. Private correspondence to Eugene Davidson, February 9,1945.
36. Mises suggested the following as possible titles: (1) Economics: A Treatise
on Human Artion, ( 2 ) Man and Reality: A Treatise on Human Action, (3) Means
and En&: A Tmtise on Eccmomics, (4) Man in the Pumit of a Better Life: A
Treatie on Economics, and (5) Human Action: A Treatzie on Economics. Next to
this final suggestion, Davidson wrote "I like this" but worried that it "doesn't
make the subject immediately clear."

Introduction to the Scholar's Edition

xv

States economics profession with the publication of Paul Samuelson's Foundations of Economic Analysis in 1947. 3 7
In the decades following the appearance of Human Action, it was
left to Mises's own students, who studied with him while he served as
an unsalaried professor at New York University from 1945-1969, to
take u p the task of developing, propagating, and extending Austrian
School theory. Preeminent among these students was Murray N.
Rothbard, whose Man, Economy, and State in 1962 ,j8America's Great
Depression in 1963, and a long series of theoretical and historical
studies,3Yprepared the groundwork for a full-scale revival of the
Austrian School in the 1970s (precipitated by F.A. Hayek's Nobel
Prize in 1974) and the 1980s.~T h e revival became firmly entrenched and internationalized4'in the 1990swith the establishment
of scholarlyjournals dedicated to advancingMisesian economics, and
a vast and continuing series of papers, conferences, books, teaching
seminars, and professional meetings."

H

UMAN ACTION
and Nationaliikonmie have the same overall
structure of seven parts, and the bulk of the English edition
consists of material directly translated from the German. However,
significant differences exist. Human Action is considerably longer,
and contains numerous additions to its predecessor. There are also
passages, sections, and chapters in Nationalakonomie which were
either omitted, shortened, or significantly altered in Human Action.

3 7. (New York: Atheneum, [1947] 1967).
38. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute [I9621 1993).
39. (New York: Richardson and Snyder, [I9631 1983); also, Power and
Market (Kansas City: Sheed bdrews and McMeel, 1970); The Lo ic ofAction
(Brookfield, Vt.: Edward Elgar, 19977); see David Gordon, bumzY N.
Rothbard: A Scholar In Defense of Freedom (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises
Institute, 1986).
40. Rothbard's efforts culminated in a monumental two-volume history of
economic thought, Economic Thou ht Before Adam Smith, vol. 1 and Classical
Economics, vol. 2 (Brookfield, Vt.: fidward Elgar, 199.5).
41. As further evidence, Human Actzon has been translated into Spanish,
French, Italian, Clunese, Portuguese,Japanese, and Rumanian.
42. For a sample of this output, see The Awtrian Economics Study Guide
(Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von fises Institute, 1998; and continuouslyupdated).

xvi

Human Action

The most important addition in Human Ahon is Chapter VI on
uncertainty. This chapter does not appear in its predecessor, nor is
its subject matter discussed elsewhere. Here, ,Mses further clarifies
his earlier epistemological investigations through the introduction of the categorical distinction between apodictic certainty (the
realm of praxeology), class probability (the realm of the natural
sciences), and case probability (the realm of history). Several
commentators have noted the similarity of Mises's distinction
between class probability and case probability and that between risk
and uncertainty introduced by Knight in Risk, Uncertaintyand Profit
in 1921.43Yet, it does not appear that Mises was influenced by
Knight in this regard. Mises had been long familiar with Knight's
work, and had already made reference to Risk, Uncefiainty and
Profit in Nationalokonomie in conjunction with his discussion of
profit and uncertainty? Rather, it appears more likely that MisesS
Chapter VI was stimulated and influenced by his younger brother,
Richard von Mises (1883-1953). A professor of aerodynamics and
applied mathematics at Harvard University, Richard von Mises's
most outstanding theoretical achievement was his contribution,
from 1919 onward, to the frequency theory of probability.4s In
principle, Ludwig accepted Richard's frequency interpretation of
probability, but Ludwig provided a new definition of randomness,
and thus significantlyimproved on Richard's
Apart from the addition of Chapter VI, all other changes or
additions to Human Adon from its predecessor can be described as
non-substantial. Some material is reorganized,the discussion of some
subjects is expanded or further applications are provided, and there
are some changes in emphasis or perspective. Most reorganization
concerns the book's first philosophical parts, i.e., Chapters I and
11.Thus, in order to account for an English-American audience and
43. See, for instance, Rothbard, Man, Ecmrmy, and State, pp. 498-501; HansHermann Hoppe, "On Certainty and Uncertainty, Or: How Rational Can
Our Expectations Be?," Review ofAustrian Economics, 10, no. 1 (1997), 49-78.
44. Nationalokonmie, p. 268.
45. See Richard von Mises, Probability, Statkthand Tmth (New York: Dover,
1957). The first edition appeared in 1928 in German (Julius Springer Verlag).
46. See Hans-I-Iermann Hoppe and Jeffrey M. Herbener, "The Story of
Human Action: 1940-1 966," Q u a r t p ~ ~ J o u n z a i o f A ~
Ecrmmicr,2, no. 1 (1999).

Introduction to the Scholar's Edition

xvii

its different philosophical background and tradition, Mises completely rewrote and rearranged the material presented here.47In
addition, H u m n Action contains a new Chapter 111("Economics and
the Revolt against Reason"). In Nationalokonomie, the subject matter
of Chapter IX of H u m a n Action ("The Role of Ideas") is discussed in
a much longer chapter of the same title ("Die Idee im H a ~ z d e l n ' ? . ~
The
~
expansions, further applications, and changes of emphasis or perspective concern Parts IIIthrough VII.
Augmentations
to Nationalokonomie
Chapters
XXXV "The Welfare Principle versus the Market Principle" (pp. 829-850)
XXXVIII "The Place of Economics in Learning" (pp. 863-876)
Sections
XV.6
"Freedom" (pp. 279-285)
XV.7
"Inequality of Wealth and Income" (pp. 285-286)
"Entrepreneurial Profits and Losses in a Progressing Economy"
XV.9
(pp. 292-299)
"Promoters, Managers, Technicians, and Bureaucrats" (pp. 300-307)
XV.10
XVI. 15 "The Chimera of Xonmarket Prices" (pp. 392-394)
XWI.8 "The Mobility of the Investor" (pp. 514-5 17)
XXV2
"The Socialist Doctrine" (pp. 689-691)
XXVI.4 "Trial and Error" (pp. 700-70 1)
XXVLI.3 "The Delimitation of Governmental Functions" (pp. 7 15-7 19)
XXVII.5 "The Meaning of Laissez Faire" (pp. 725-727)
XXX.3 "Minimum Wage Rates" (pp. 763-773)
Elaborations
XI.2
"The Theory of Value and Socialism" (pp. 206-207)
w ..4,
'The Metapharica! Eq!qlner?t ef h e Termin&gy ;.f Ddidca! E&!e"
(pp. 272-273)
XVII.6 "Inflation and Deflation; Inflationism and Deflationism" (pp. 419-42 1)
47. Thus, for instance, Nationaliikonomie contains in its first two chapters
several references to Immanuel Kant and Heinrich Rickert, as well as
references to Franz Brentano, Wilhelm Windelband, Ernst Mach, Fritz
Mauthner, and Hans Rothacker which were omitted in Human Action.
48. Similarly, Nationaliikonomie's cha ter Die Idee im Handeln contains
references to Hendrik de Man, Hans Del ruck, Carl Menger, Hans Kelseren,
Ludwig Gurnplowicz, Gustav Ratzenhofer, Joseph-Arthur Gobineau, and
Houston Chamberlain not to be found in the corresponding Chapters I11 and
M of Human Action.

!

xviii

Human Action

Elaborations (cont.)
XVIII.4 "Some Applications of the Time-Preference Theory" (pp. 496499)
XX.6
"The Alleged Absence of Depressions Under Totalitarian
Management" (pp. 562-563)
"The Difference Between Credit Expansion and Simple Inflation"
XX.7
(p. 568)
XXI.6 "A Comparison Between the Historical Explanation of Wage Rates
and the Regression Theorem" (p. 606)
XXI.7 "Remarks About the Popular Interpretation of the 'Industrial
Revolution"' (pp. 6 13-61 9)
,YXXI.S "The Chimera of Contracyciical Policies7'(pp. 792-794)

T

he commercial success of Human Action exceeded both the
author's and the publisher's expectations. It was published on
September 14, 1949; three weeks later, the press was already
planning the second and even a third printing. In a memo, Chester
Kerr (who later headed the press when the second edition was
issued) spoke of sales of "an extraordinary rate for a $10 volume of
solid reading." In January 1950, it became a Book-of-the-Month
Club alternate selection. Reviews, as one might expect,were highly
polarized, with the popular press treating it as the brilliant work
of a genius, while academic economists (Seymour E. Harris4' and
John K. GalbraithsO)regarded it as shockingly archaic and insuficiently pious towards the profession. John Hicks alternately
praised ("a powerful book") and mocked the book ("~Misesets up
Capitalism as a god, which it is sinful to touch"),51while Ludwig
Lachmann gave Mises one of his few enthusiastic academic en1 1
borsements ia the pages of Economica.5 2Ar aeDare
berween iviises's
student and prime defender Murray Rothbard and detractor
George J. Schuller tookplace in the pages of the Amwican Economic
49. "Capitalist Manifesto," Satzll-day Review of Literamre (September 24,
1949), 31-32.
50. "In Defense of Laissez-Faire," New Ymk TimesBook Review (October 30,
1949).
51. "Dogmatic Liberalism," Manchester Gzlardian (December 30,1949), 3.
52. "The Science of Human Action," Economica (November 1951),
412-427.

Introduction to the Scholar's Edition

xix

~miew.'~
Regardless
of the mixed reception, and contrary to the
widespread opinion that Mises would surely be the last member of
the Austrian School, H u m n Action served as rhe essential foundation
for the huge and growing free-market political movement and an
academic movement of Austrian School economists, for which it
continues to serve as the primary text today.
The first edition of H u m n Action was continuously in print for
fourteen years. In February 1961, Mises initiated the second revised
in a letter to Ivan Bierly of the Volker Fund,
edition of H u w n Ammon
a foundation that had supported Mises's teaching and writing. In
March, Mises wrote the publisher, "It seems to me that now after
twelve years it is time to publish a new edition, revised in some points
and slightly enlarged." He informed Yale that he could have the
changes by the end of the year. Yale Press received the news with
enthusiasm and waited for Mises's changes.
What followed was another trial in ~Wses'slife. The second edition
went into production far later than anticipated, which left the publisher without copies of Human Action for fifteen months. ~Miseswas
never given galley proofs to examine before publication. When the
second edition finally appeared in May 1963, it was riddled with
typographical errors. There were missing paragraphs and lines, duplicated lines, and even a duplicated page. There were no running
heads on the pages and the printing was variously light and dark
Despite protests, the publisher refused to accept full responsibility,
which led Mises to secure the services of an attorney. In the de fm
settlement @Gsesnever accedkd to it entirely), Yale distributed errata
sheets and agreed to prepare a corrected third edition when the second
edition sold out. The matter was finally settled when Henry Regnery
worked to secure the rights for his publishing company in early 1966.
He reset the book and published the third edition later that year (at
which time II/Iises was eighty-five years old).547SS
53. American Economic Review, 40, no. 3 (June 1950), 41 8 4 2 2 ; 41, no. 1
(March 195l), 181-190; 41, no. 5 (December l95l), 943-946.
54. The mystery of who precisely was responsible for mangling the treatise
has never been solved. Margit von Mises, discussing the matter in her memoirs,
offers this: "the villain in a Perry Mason sto is easy to detect It is always the
one whom you suspect least and whom the au or treats with a certain indulgent
negligence." My Years with Ludwig von Miser (Cedar Falls, Iowa: Center for
Futures Education, [I9761 1984), p. 111.

2

xx

Human Action

Mises left no essay or speech explaining the changes (some of
them substantial)made to later editions of Human Action. Original
drafts of manuscripts delivered to the publisher are not available.
Neither are personal notes available, from Mises or the publisher, or
information on the precise timing of the changes. Some changes to
later editions were suggested by Mises's friend Percy L. Greaves, Jr.,
in a memo dated October 12,1961. For instance, Greaves suggested
that Mises alter the content of paragraph three on page 187, dealing
with German aggressiveness, to apply to Russia. The paragraph was
eliminated entirely. Greaves also suggested that the section on International Monetary Cooperation beginning on page 473 "be brought
up to date." Four paragraphs were added to the end of the original
(unchanged) section. Referring to immigration, Mises writes on
pages 820-82 1:"Neither does it mean that there can be any question
of appeasing aggressors by removing migration barriers. As conditions are today, the Americas and Australia in admitting German,
Italian, and Japanese immigrants merely open their doors to the
vanguards of hostile armies." Greaves suggested amending this passage, but no change was made in the second edition. For the third
edition, the passage is eliminated altogether and replaced with an
additional paragraph calling for a philosophy of mutual cooperation
to replace the view that there are "irreconcilable antagonisms" between groups in society.
Other notable changes were made to later editions, some of which
cannot be considered improvements. Pages 796799 of the first
edition include some insightful remarks about the workings of German exchange controls and international barter agreements in the
1930s. These comments, cited and built upon in a later historical
study of the New Deai by ~06bard,'%reentireiy eiiminated from
subsequent editions. The final two paragraphs on page 563, in which
Mises sheds light on the relationship between public opinion and an
inflationary monetary policy, are also eliminated. As a smaller
matter, for later editions, the section on imperfect competition was
changed from the 1949 edition, and not with clarifying results. For
55. The "fourth revised edition" (Irvin on-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation
for Economic Education, 1996) is the thirc? edition with an expanded index.
56. Murray N. Rothbard, "New DealMonetarySystem," Watershed $Empire,
ed. Leonard Liggio (Colorado Springs, Colo.: Kalph Myles, 1972), pp. 43-48.

Introduction to the Scholar's Edition

xxi

instance, the 1949 edition includes this sentence: "The confusion
which led to the idea of imperfect or monopolistic competition stems
from a misinterpretation of the term control ofmpply" (p. 3 57). Later
editions change the sentence to introduce ambiguity: "Considerable confusion stems from a misinterpretation of the term control
of supply. "57

On monopoly theory, the first edition contains a crucial paragraph that was eliminated in subsequent editions, a passage that
elucidates how far Mises's understanding of the monopoly price
was from the mainstream neoclassical view. "Monopoly prices," he
writes in this and later editions, "are the outcome of a deliberate
design tending toward a restriction of trade" (p. 356). In the
original edition Mises added an additional paragraph explaining
what is meant by the word "deliberate." It is only the economist
who can contrast the competitive price with the monopoly price;
the businessman, "like every other seller," only wants to realize the
highest price attainable. With this passage, we gain a deeper
understanding of Mises's own theory, which is closer to the Rothbardian view that in the actual operation of the free market, there
is no meaningful way to distinguish between a monopoly and a
competitive price. Indeed, neither Mises nor Rothbard regarded
their respective positions on monopoly as in~om~atible.'~
One particular change has caused considerable confusion. In
section XV6, "Freedom," the original edition focuses on the necessity of curbing government power, and concludes that government
is "by necessity the opposite of liberty" and is a "barantor of
liberty and is compatible with liberty only if its range is adequately
restricted to the preservation of economic freedom" (p. 283).59
57. Additions in later editions not discussed here includeXVI.6, pars. 5-6 and
XXVII.6 "Corruption." As further evidence of a general dunning of language
that takes place in later editions, consider that on page 566, in a discussion of the
manner in which busts follow artificial booms, the last sentence of the
continued paragraph ("They are inevitable") was removed.
58. Mises conveyed this view in private correspondence, and during his
New York seminar, where he was frequently asked about possible differences
with Rothbard following the release ofMan, Economy, and State (Bettina Bien
Greaves's notes, privately held, 1962-1965).
59. This is consistent with Mises's Liberal&: "Human society cannot do
without the apparatus of the state, but the whole of mankind's progress has
had to be achieved against the resistance and opposition of the state and its

xxii

Human Action

Revised editions preserve that passage with only minor alterations,
but add seven wholly new paragraphs preceding it. These new
paragraphs in the revised editions introduce a different focus on the
necessary and specific powers of government, which appear rather
expansive by Misesian standards: "The maintenance of a government apparatus of courts, police officers, prison, and of armed
forces requires considerable expenditure. To levy taxes for these
purposes is fully compatible with the freedom the individual enjoys
in a free market economy" (third ed., p. 282).
Also, these later editions substantially alter the definition of freedom itself. In the original, Mises states: "Aman is free as far as he can
live and get on without being at the mercy of arbitrary decisions on the
part of other people" (p. 279). Mises does not define "arbitrary," but
he appears to have in mind actions that infringe on someone's person
or property without his agreement. Revised editions, in contrast,
state: "we may define freedom as that state of affairs in which the
individual's decision to choose is not constrained by governmental
violence beyond the margin which the praxeological law restricts it
anyway" (third ed., p. 282). The phrase "praxeologicallaw" (meaning
the law of cause and effect in human affairs) works here as qualifier;
it is so 'expansively applied that any government activity, however
arbitrary, that is said to preserve or achieve "freedom" might be
deemed permissible. The original definition, more specificand smngent, rules out arbitrary interventions altogether.
Thus, these added passages in later editions go even further to
permit conscription, and it is here we find a direct inconsistency
withMises's prior writings. In particular, the passage is at odds with
Mises's defense of secession, which he elevated to the rank of a core
principle of the liberal program, as explained in Nation, State, a n d
Economy in 191960and even more emphatically in Liberalism in
1927." If every person is entitled to secede from the state then the
ower of coercion. N o wonder that all who have had something new to offer
Eumanity have had nothing good to say of the state or its laws!" (San
Francisco: Cobden Press, [I9271 1985), p. 58.
60. "No people and no part of a people shall be held against its will in a
political association that it does not want." Nation, State, and Economy (New
York University Press, [I9191 1983), p. 65.
61. For Mises, the only possible objections to unlimited secession were
practical or technical, not principled concerns. Liberalism, pp. 109-1 10.

Introduction to the Scholar's Edition

xxiii

state becomes a kind of voluntary organization from which exit is
always allowed; accordingly, any form of conscription would have
to be considered illegitimate and impermissible. Even more strikingly, however, the passage stands in contradiction to the discussion, and rejection, in Nationalokonomie of conscription as a species
of interventionism which, according to its own internal "logic,"
leads inevitably to socialism and total war. "Military conscriptjon,"
1Miseswrote, "leads to compulsory public service of everyone capable
of work. The supreme commander controls the entire people,... the
mobilization has become total; people and state have become part
of the army; war socialism has replaced the market economy."62
Major Changes
in Later Editions
Deletions from
the First Edition
"What is wrong with the Germans...means of waging
war" (p. 187)
"The words freedom and liberty...he can attain liberty"
XV6, pars. 1-4
(pp. 279-280)
XVI.6.3, par. 3:
"In calling the monopolist 's... emergence of monopoly
prices" @. 356)
"It is no answer to this to object...a sham, they are absent"
XX.6, pars. 43-44:
@. 563)
XXXI.6, pars. 10-23: ("Remarks about the Nazi Barter Agreements"):
Entire section (pp. 796-799)
XXXIV.1, par. 14:
"Neither does it mean that...vanguards of hostile
armies7'(pp. 820-821; deleted from 3d edition only)
M.2, par. 32:

Additions to the
Second and Third Editions
UPhilosophersand lawyers have ...no freedom at all"
(pp. 279-282; 3d ed.)
,XVI.6, sea. 5-6:
"If the available quantities...a cartel depends" (pp. 361-362;
3d ed.)
XW.19, pars. 28-3 1: "The International Monetary Fund ...monetary troubles"
(p. 478; 3d ed.)
XXVII.6, pars. 9-18: ("Corruption"): "An analysis of interventionism ...
as justified" (pp. 734-736; 3d ed.)

XV.6, pars. 1-13:

62. h'atimaliikonomie,pp. 725-728.

xxiv

Human Action

H

UW~NACTION,
building on and expandingits German prede-

cessor, transformed Austrian economics, as it is understood
today, into a predominantly American phenomenon with a distinctly Misesian imprint, and made possible the continuation of
the Austrian School after the mid-twentieth century. Thus the first
edition assumes an importance that extends beyond the mere historical. It reveals the issues and concerns that Mises considered primary
when releasing, at the height of his intellectual powers, the most
complete and integrated statement of his career. In particular, making
the unchanged first edition available again retrieves important passages that were later eiiminated, and clarifies questions raised by
unnecessary, and, in some cases, unfortunate additions and revisions
made to later editions.
That the original edition represents the fullest synthesis of
Mises's thought on method, theory, and policy, and is the book that
sustained the Austrian tradition and the integrity of economic
science after the socialist, Keynesian, Walrasian, Marshallian, and
positivist conquests of economic thought, is reason enough to reissue
the original on its fiftleth anniversary, making it widely available for
the first time in nearly four decades. A high place must be reserved
in the history of economic thought, indeed, in the history of ideas,
for ~Wses'smasterwork. Even today, Human Action points the way
to a brighter future for the science of economics and the practice
of human liberty
Jeffrey M. Herbener (Grove City College)
I-Ians-Hermann Hoppe F ~ v e r s i t y of Nevada, Las Vegas)
Joseph T Saierno (Pace University
October 199823

63. Jorg G~lidoHiilsmann and David Gordon also contributed to this
Introduction.

FOREWORD

F

K 0 M the fall of I 934 until the summer of 1940 I had the
privilege of occupying the chair of International Economic Kelations at the Graduate Institute of International
Studies in Geneva, Switzerland. In the serene atmosphere
of this seat of learning, which two eminent scholars, Paul
Mantoux and William E. Kappard, had organized and continued to direct, I set about executing an old plan of mine,
to write a comprehensive treatise on economics. T h e bookNationalokonomie, Theorie des Handelns zmd Wirtschaftens
-was published in Geneva in the gIoomy days of May, 19.10.
T h e present volume is not a translation of this earlier book.
Although the general structure has been little changed, all
parts have been rewritten.
T o my friend Henry Hazlitt I wish to off er my very special
thanks for his kindness in reading the manuscript and giving
me most valuable suggestions about it. I must also gratefully
acknou~ledgemy obligations to Mr. Arthur Coddard for linguistic and stylistic advice. I am furthcrmore deeply indebted
to Mr. Eugene A. Davidson, Editor of the Yale University
Press, and to Mr. Leonard E. Read, President of the Foundation for Economic Education, for their kind encouragcment
alld ~ ~rrw*n n n r t
I need hardly add that none of these gentlemen is either directly or indirectly responsible for any opinions contained in
this work.

LUDWIGvos MISES
New York, February, 1949.

Permission has been granted by the publishers to use quatations
from the following works: George Santayana, Persons and Places
(Charles Scribner's Sons); William James, T h e Varieties of Rkligious Experience (Longmans, Green & Co.); Harley Lutz, Guideposts t o a Free Ecorzonzy (McGraw-Hill Book Company); Committee on Postwar Tax Policy, A Tax Program for a Solvent
America (The Ronald Press Company).

CONTENTS
Introduction
I
Economics and Praxeology
2
T h e Epistemological Problem of a General Theory
of Human Action
3 Economic Theory and the Practice of Human Action
4 RCsumC

I

4

7
10

Chapter I. Acting Man
I
Purposeful Action and Animal Reaction
II
r T h e Prerequisites of Human Action
'3
On Happiness
On Instincts and Impulses
3 Human Action as an Ultimate Given
'7
4 Rationality and Irrationality; Subjectivism and Objectivity of Praxeological Research
I8
5 Causality as a Requirement of Action
2z
6 The Alter Ego
23
On the Serviceableness of Instincts
The Absolute End
Vegetative Man
Chapter 11. T h e Epistemological Problems of the Sciences of
Human Action
I
Praxeology and History
30
2
T h e Formal and Aprioristic Character of Praxeology 3 2
The Alleged Logical Heterogeneity of Primitive Man
3 The A Priori and Reality
-7 8
The Principle of hiethodological Individualism
4'
I and We
5 T h e Principle of Methodological Singularism
44

4

The Individual and Changing Features of Human
Action
46
7 The Scope and the Specific Method of History
47
8 Conception and Understanding
51
hTaturalHistory and Human History
9 On Ideal Types
59
10 The Procedure of Economics
64
II
The Limitations on Praxeological Concepts
69
6

Chapter 111. Economics and the Revolt Against Reason
I
The Revolt Against Reason
2
The Logical Aspect of Polylogism
3 The Praxeological Aspect of Palylogism
4 Racial Polylogism
j Polylogism and Understanding
6 The Case for Reason

72

75
77
84
87
89

Chapter 1V. A First Analysis of the Category of Action
I
Ends and Means
2
The ScaIe of Value
3 The Scale of Needs
4 Action as an Exchange
Chapter V. Time
I
The Temporal Character of Praxeology
2
Past, Present, and Future
3 The Economization of Time
4 The Temporal ReIation Between Actions
Chapter VI. Uncertainty
I Encertainty and Acting
2
T h e Meaning
Probability
3 Class Probability
4 Case Probability
5 Numerical Evaluation of Case Probability
6 Betting, Gambling, and Playing Games
7 Praxeological Prediction

of

Chapter VII. Action Within the World
The Law of Marginal Utility
I
z The Law of Returns

99
100

101
102

105
I e5
107

I 10
113
115
117

CONTENTS

xxix

3

Human Labor as a Means
13I
Immediately Gratifying Labor and Mediately Gratifying Labor
1he Creative Genius
4 Production
14"

O F SOCIETY
PARTTWOA C ~ I O NWITHINTHE FRAMEWORK

Chapter VIII. H u m a n Society
I
Human Cooperation
I43
2
A Critique of the Holistic and Metaphysical View
of Society
145
Praxcology and Liberalism
Liberalism and Religion
3 The Division of Labor
157
4 T h e Ricardian Law of Association
158
Current Errors Concerning the Law of Association
5 T h e Effects of the Division of Labor
163
6 T h e Individual Within Society
164
Thc Fable of the Mystic Communion
7 T h e Great Society
I 68
T
h
e
Instinct
of
Agression
and
Destruction
8
'69
Currcnt Misinterpretations of Modern Natural Science, EspecialIy of Darwinism
Chapter 1X. T h e Role of Ideas
I
Human Reason
2
World View and Ideology
The Fight Against Error
3 Might
Traditionalism as an Ideology
4 Meliorism and the Idea of Progress
Chapter X. Exchange W i t h i n Society
r Autistic Exchange and Interpersonal Exchange
2 Contractual Bonds and Hegemonic Bonds
3 Calculative Action

195
'96
'99

Chapter XI. Valuation Without Calculation
I
The Gradation of the Means
ZOI
2
The Barter-Fiction of the Elementary Theory of
202
Value and Prices
The Theory of Value and Socialism
3 The Problem of Economic Calculation
207
4 Economic Calculation and the Market
2 10
Chapter XII. The Sphere of Economic Calculation
I
The Character of the Monetary Entries
2 The Limits of Economic Calculation
3 The Changeability of Prices
4 Stabilization
5 The Root of the Stabilization Idea
-

213
215
2 18
220
225

Chapter XIII. Monetary Calculation as a Tool of Action
I
Monetary Calculation as a Method of Thinking
230
2 Economic Calculation and the Science of Human
232
Action

Chapter XIV. The Scope and Method of Catallactics
I The Delimitation of the CataIlactic Problems
233
The Denial of Economics
2 The Method of Imaginary Constructions
237
3 T h e Pure Market Economy
238
The Maximization of Profits
4 The Autistic Economy
244
5 The State of Rest and the Evenly Rotating Econ245
omy
6 The Stationary Economy
251
7 The Integration of Catallactic Functions
252
The Entrepreneurial Function in the Stationary
Economy

CONTENTS

Chapter XV. T h e Market
The Characteristics of the Market Economy
258
Capital
2 60
Capitalism
264
The Sovereignty of the Consumers
270
The Metaphorical Employment of the Terminology
of Political Rule
Competition
273
Freedom
279
Inequality of Wealth and Income
285
2 86
Entrepreneurial Profit and Loss
Entrepreneurial Profits and Losses in a Progressing
Economy
292
Some Observations on the Underconsumption Bogey
and on the Purchasing Power Argument
Promoters, Managers, Technicians, and Bureaucrats 300
T h e Selective Process
308
T h e Individual and the Market
3x1
Business Propaganda
3'6
T h e "Volkswirtschaft"
3'9

Chapter XVI. Prices
The Pricing Process
324
Valuation and Appraisement
328
The
Prices
of
the
Goods
of
Higher
Orders
33 0
3
A Limitation on the Pricing of Factors of Production
4 Cost Accounting
336
5 Logical Catallactics Versus Mathematical Catallactics 347
6 Monopoly Prices
35 4
The Mathematical Treatment of the Theory of M o nopoly Prices
7 Good Will
376
8 Monopoly of Demand
380
9 Consumption as Affected by Monopoly Prices
381
10 Price Discrimination on the Part of the Seller
385
1 1 Price Discrimination on the Part of the Buyer
388
I 2 T h e Connexity of Prices
388
I 3 Prices and Income
390
14 Prices and Production
391
15 The Chimera of Nonmarket Prices
39 2
1

2

mxii

HUMAN
ACTION

Chapter XVII. Indirect Exchange
Media of Exchange and Money
395
Observations on S o ~ n eWidespread Errors
395
Demand for Money and Supply of Il/loney
3 98
The Epistemological Import of Carl Menger's Theory
of the Origin of Moncy
T h e Determination of the Purchasing Power of
Money
405
T h e Problem of IIume and Mill and the Driving
413
Force of Money
Cash-Induced and Goods-Induced Changes in Purchasing Power
4'6
Inflation and Deflation; Inflationism and Deflationism
Monetary Calculation and Changes in Purchasing
Power
42 1
The Anticipation of Expected Changes in Purchasing Power
423
The Specific Value of Money
425
The Import of thc Money Relation
427
429
T h e Money-Substitutes
T h e Limitation of the Issuance of Fiduciary Media 43 I
Obscrvations on the Discussions Concerning Free
Banking
The Size and Composition of Cash Holdings
445
Balances of Payments
447
Interlocal Exchange Rates
449
Interest Rates and the Money Relation
455
459
Secondary Media of Exchange
The Inflationist View of History
463
The Gold Standard
468
International Monetary Cooperation
Chapter XVIII. Action in the Passing of Time
I
Perspective in the Valuation of Time Periods
476
2
Time Preference as an Essential Requisite of Action 480
Observations on the Evolution of the Time-Preference Theory
3 Capital Goods
487
4 Period of Prod~ction,Waiting Time, and Period of
Provision
490
Prolongation of the Period of Provision Beyond the

5
6
7

8
9

Expected Duration of the Actor's Life
Some Applications of the Time-Preference Theory
The Convertibility of Capital Goods
499
The Influence of the Past Upon Action
502
Accumulation, Maintenance, and Consumption of
5"
Capital
The Mobility of the Investor
514
Money and Capital; Saving and Investment
517

Chapter XIX. T h e Rate of Interest
I The Phenomenon of Interest
z Originary Intcrcst
3 T h e Height of Interest Rates
4 Originary Intercst in the Changing Economy
5 T h e Computation of Interest

521
523
529
531
53 3

Chapter XX. Intercst, Credit Expansion, and the Trade Cyclc
I
The Proble~ns
535
z The Entreprcneurial Co~nponentin the Gross Market Katc of Interest
536
3 The Price Premium as a Component of the Gross
Markct Rate of Intcrest
538
542
4 The Loan Market
5 The Effects of Changes in the Money Relation Upon
Originary Interest
545
6 The Gross Market Rate of Interest as Affected by
Inflation and Credit Expansion
547
The Alleged Absence of Depressions Under Totalitarian Management
7 T h e Gross Market Rate of Interest as Affected bv
Deflation and Credit Contraction
564
The Difference Between Credit Expansion and Simple Inflation
8 T h e Monetary or Circulation Credit Theory of the
Trade Cycle
568
T
h
e
Market
Economy
as
Affected
by
the
Recur9
rence of the Trade Cycle
573
Thc Role Played by Unemployed Factors of Production in the First Stages of a Boom
The Fallacies of the Nonmonetary Explanations of
the Trade Cycle

xaiv

HUMAN
ACTION

Chapter XXI. W o r k and Wages
I
Introversive Labor and Extroversive Labor
584
2
Joy and Tedium of Labor
585
3 Wages
589
4 Catallactic Unemployment
595
j
Gross Wage Rates and Net Wage Rates
5 98
6 Wages and Subsistence
600
A Comparison Between the Historical Explanation of
Wage Rates and the Regression Theorem
T
h
e Supply of Labor as Affected by the Disutility
7
of Labor
606
Remarks About the Popular Interpretation of the
"Industrial Revolution"
8 Wage Rates as Affected by the Vicissitudes of the
Market
619
9 T h e Labor Market
620
The Work of Animals and of Slaves
Chapter XXII. T h e Nonhuman Original Factors of Production
General Observations Concerning the Theory of
I
Kent
631
2
The Time Factor in Land Utilization
634
3 The Submarginal Land
636
4 The Land as Standing Room
638
j The Prices of Land
639
The Myth of the Soil
Chaptcr XXIII. T h e Data of the Markct
I
The Theory and the Data
642
2
T h e Role of Power
643
7 T h e Historical Role of War and Conquest
645
Real Man as a Datum
646
j T h e Period of Adjustment
648
6 T h e Limits of Property Rights and the Problems of
External Costs and External Economies
650
The External Economies of Intellectual Creation
Privileges and Quasi-privileges

4

Chapter XXIV. Harmony and Conflict of Interests
I
T h e Ultimate Source of Profit and Loss on the
Market
660

The Limitation of Offspring
663
3 The Harmony of the "Rightly Understood" Interests
669
4 Private Property
678
5 The Conflicts of Our Age
680
2

Chapter XXV. T h e Imaginary Construction of a Socialist
Society
I The Historical Origin of the Socialist Idea
685
2
The Socialist Doctrine
689
3 The Praxeological Character of Socialism
691
Chapter XXVI. T h e Impossibility of Economic CalcuIation
Under Socialism
I The Problem
694
2
Past Failures to Conceive the Problem
697
3 Recent Suggestions for Socialist Economic Calculation
699
4 Trial and Error
700
5 The Quasi-market
701
6 The Differential Equations of Mathematical Economics
706

Chapter XXVII. The Government and the Market
I
The Idea of a Third System
712
t T h e In:erven:ion
713
3 The Delimitation of Governmental Functions
715
4 Righteousness as the Ultimate Standard of the Individual's Actions
719
5 The Meaning of Laissez Faire
725
6 Direct Government Interference with Consumption 727
Chapter XXVIII. Interference by Taxation
I
The Neutral Tax
2
The Total Tax

3 Fiscal and Nonfiscal Objectives of Taxation
4 The Three Classes of Tax Interventionism

733
734

Chapter XXIX. Rcstriction of Production
I
The Kature of Restriction
2
The Prize of Restriction
3 Restriction as a Privilege
4 Restriction as an Economic System
Chapter XXX. Interference with the Structure of Prices
The Government and the Autonomy of the Market 7 jt
I
The Market's Reaction to Government Interference 756
2
Observations on the Causes of the Decline of Ancient
Civilization
3 Minimum Wage Rates
763
The Catallactic Aspects of 1,abor Unionism
Chapter XXXI. Currency and Credit Manipulation
I
The Government and the Currency
7 74
z The Interventionist Aspect of Legal Tender Legisla777
tion
3 The Evolution of Modern Methods of Currency
14anipulation
780
4 The Objectives of Currency Devaluation
783
5 Credit Expansion
787
T h e Chimera of Contracyclical Policies
6 Foreign Exchange Control and Bilateral Exchange
Agreements
794
Remarks about the ?cTaziBarter Agreements
Chapter XXXII. Confiscation and Redistribution
-.L he Phiiosophy of Confiscation
I
z Land Reform
3 Confiscatory Taxation
Confiscatory Taxation and Risk-Taking
Chapter XXXIII. Syndicalism and Corporativism
I
The Syndicalist Idea
2 The FaIlacies of Syndicalism
3 Syndicalist Elements in Popular Policies
4 Guild Socialism and Corporativism

800
80 I
802

808
809
81 I
812

Chapter XXXIV. T h e Economics of W a r
I
Total War
2 War and the Market Economy
3 War and Autarky
4 The Futility of War

817
82 I
824
827

Chapter XXXV. T h c Welfare Principle Versus the LMarket
Principle
I
The Case Against the Market Economy
829
2
Poverty
831
3 Inequality
836
847
4 Insecurity
5 Social Justice
849
Chapter XXXVI. T h e Crisis of Interventionism
I
The Harvest of Interventionism
The Exhaustion of the Reserve Fund
2
3 The End of Interventionism

Chapter XXXVII. T h e Nondescript Character of Economics
I
The Singularity of Economics
2
Economics and Public Opinion
3 The Illusion of the Old Liberals
Chapter XXXVIII. T h e Place of Economics in Learning
I
The Study of Economics
863
2
Economics as a Profession
865
3 Forecasting as a Profession
866
4 Economics and the Universities
868
5 General Education and Economics
872
6 Economics and the Citizen
874
7 Economics and Freedom
87 5
Chapter XXXIX. Economics and the EssentiaI Problems of
Human Existence
I
Science and Life
877
2
Economics and Judgments of Value
879
88 I
3 Economic Cognition and Human Action
Index
883

INTRODUCTION
I. Economics and Praxeology
CONOMICS is the

youngest of all sciences. In the last two hundred
years, it is true, many new sciences have emerged from the disciplines familiar to the ancient Greeks. However, what happened here
was merely that parts of knowledge which had already found their
place in the complex of the old system of learning now became autonomous. The field of study was more nicely subdivided and treated
with new methods; hitherto unnoticed provinces were discovered
in it, and people began to see things from aspects different from those
of their precursors. The field itself was not expanded. But economics
opened to human science a domain previously inaccessible and never
thought of. The discovery of a regularity in the sequence and interdependence of market phenomena went beyond the limits of the
traditional system of learning. I t conveyed knowledge which could
be regarded neither as logic, mathematics, psychology, physics, nor
biology.
Philosophers had long since been eager to ascertair. the ends which
God or hTaturewas trying to realize in the course of human history.
They searched for the law of mankind's destiny and evolution. But
even those thinkers whose inquiry was free from any theological
tendency failed utterly in these endeavors because they were committed to a faulty method. They dealt with humanity as a whole or
with other holistic concepts like nation, race, or church. They set up
quite arbitrarily the ends to which the behavior of such wholes is

E

hnllnrl
tn lPnrl R n t thPr7r.r\xllrl--+
rn+:,Cl.n+nr:l.r
n-rrrr,r
cL,
uvuuu cv 1 - a ~ .Y U L
LJLC~J LWUIU
UVL J ~ L ~ L ~ L L V L L I Y~ L ~ W G
LLIG
L

,.,,-c:--

~UG>LIUII

regarding what factors compelled the various acting individuals to
behave in such a way that the goal aimed at by the whole's inexorable
evolution was attained. They had recourse to desperate shifts: miraculous interference of the Deity either by revelation or by the delegation of God-sent prophets and consecrated leaders, preestablished
harmony, predestination, or the operation of a mystic and fabulous
"world soul" or "national soul." Others spoke of a "cunning of nature" which implanted in man impulses driving him unwittinglv along
precisely the path Nature wanted him to take.

Human Actioa

2

Other philosophers were more reaIistic. They did not try to guess
the designs of Nature or God. They loolted at human things from
the viewpoint of government. They were intent upon establishing
rules of political action, a technique, as it were, of government and
statesmanship. Speculative minds drew ambitious plans for a thorough
reform and reconstruction of society. The more modest were satisfied with a collection and systematization of the data of historical
experience. But all were fully convinced that there was in the course
of social events no such regularity and invariance of phenomena as
had already been found in the operation of human reasoning and in
the sequence of natural phenomena. They did not search for the laws
of social cooperation because they thought that man coulcl organize
society as he pleased. If social conditions did not fulfill the wishes
of the reformers, if their utopias proved unrealizable, the fault was
seen in the moral failure of man. Social problems were considered
ethical problems. What was needed in order to construct the ideal
society, they thought, was good princes and virtuous citizens. With
righteous men any utopia might be realized.
'The discovery of the inescapable interdependence of market
phenomena overthrew this opinion. Bewildered, people had to face
a new view of society. They learned with stupefaction that there is
another aspect from khich human action might be viewed than that
of good and bad, of fair and unfair, of just and unjust. In the course
of social events there prevails a regularity of phenomena to which
man must adjust his action if he wishes to succeed. It is futile to approach social facts with the attitude of a censor who approves or disapproves from the point of view of quite arbitrary standards and
subjective judgments of value. One must study the laws of human
action and social cooperation as the phvsicist studies the laws of
nature. Human action and social cooperation seen as the object of a
science of given relations, no longer as a normative discipline of things
that ought to be-this was a revolution of tremendous consequences
fnr lpnrrrlerlm
5a qnd r ~ h ;
yuuw"
l n c r r-Y
\ n h x r 2s
2s f G r
ac:ion.
For more than a hundred years, however, the effects of this radical
change in the methods of reasoning were greatly restricted because
people believed that they referred only to a narrow segment of the
total field of human action, namely, to market phenomena. The classical economists met in the pursuit of their investigations an obstacle
which they failed to remove, the apparent antinomy of value. Their
theory of value was defective, and forced them to restrict the scope
of their science. Until the late nineteenth century political economy
remained a science of the "economic" aspects of human action, a
A

uL

a".2

v v A b u

uuv

T ~ ~ T ~ ! !

,

theory of wealth and selfishness. It dealt with human action only to
the extent that it is actuated by what was-very unsatisfactorilydescribed as the profit motive, and it asserted that there is in addition
other human action whose treatment is the task of other disciplines.
The transformation of thought which the classical economists had
initiated was brought to its consummation only by modern subjectivist
economics, which converted the theory of market prices into a
general theory of human choice.
For a long time men failed to realize that the transition from the
classical theory of value to the subjective theory of value was much
more than the substitution of a more satisfactory theory of market
exchange for a less satisfactory one. The general theory df choice and
preference goes far beyond the horizon which encompassed the scope
of economic problems as circumscribed by the economists from
Cantillon, Hume, and Adam Srnith down to John Stuart Mill. I t
is much more than merely a theory of the "economic side" of human
endeavors and of man's striving for commodities and an improvement in his material well-being. I t is the science of every kind of
human action. Choosing determines all human decisions. In making
his choice man chooses not only between various material things and
services. All human values are offered for option. All ends and all
means, both material and ideal issues, the sublime and the base, the
noble and the ignoble, are ranged in a single row and subjected to a
decision which picks out one thing and sets aside another. hTothing
that Inen aim at or want to avoid remains outside of this arrangement
into a unique scale of gradation and preference. The modern theory
of value widens the scientific horizon and enlarges the field of economic studies. Out of the political economy of the classical school
The ecoemerges the general theory of human action, p~axeology.~
nomic or catallactic problems are embedded in a more general
science, and can no longer be severed from this connection. N o
treatment of economic problems proper can avoid starting from acts
sf &nice; ecnnnmirs hcrnmcs a part, although the hichertn best
elaborated part, of a more universal scicnce, praxeology.
I. The term praxeology was first used in 1890 by Espinas. Cf. his article "Les
Origines de la technologie," Revue Philosophique, XVth year, X X X , I 14-1 I 5,
and his book published in Paris in 1897, with the same title.
2. The term Catallactics or the Science of Exchanges was first used by
WhateIy. Cf. his book Introductory Lectures on Political Economy (London,

1831)~p. 6 .

Human Action

4

T h e Epistemological Problem of a
General Theory of Human Action

2.

In the new science everything seemed to be problematic. It was
a stranger in the traditional system of knowledge; people were perplexed and did not know how to classify it and to assign it its proper
place. But on the other hand they were convinced that the incIusion
of economics in the catalogue of knowledge did not require a rearrangement or expansion of the total scheme. They considered their
catalogue system complete. If economics did not fit into it, the fault
could only rest with the unsatisfactory treatment that the economists
applied to their problems.
It is a complete misunderstanding of the meaning of the debates
concerning the essence, scope, and logical character of economics to
dismiss them as the scholastic quibbling of pedantic professors. It is
a widespread misconception that while pedants squandered useless
talk about the most appropriate method of procedure, economics
itself, indifferent to these idle disputes, went quietly on its way. In
the Methodenstreit between the Austrian economists and the Prussian Historical School, the self-styled "intellectuaI bodyguard of the
House of Hohenzollern," and in the discussions between the school
of John Bates Clark and American Institutionalism much more was
at stake than the question of what kind of procedure was the most
fruitful one. The real issue was the epistemological foundations of
the science of human action and its logical legitimacy. Starting from
an epistemological system to which praxeological thinking was strange
and from a logic which acknowledged as scientific-besides logic and
mathematics--only the empirical natural sciences and history, many
authors tried to deny the value and usefulness of economic theory.
Historicism aimed at replacing it by economic history; positivisnl
recommended the substitution of an illusory social science which
should adopt the logical structure and pattern of Newtonian mechanics. Both these schools agreed in a radical rejection of all the achievements of economic thought. It was impossible for the economists to
keep silent in the face of all these attacks.
T h e radicalism of this wholesale condemnation of economics was
very soon surpassed by a still more universal nihilism. From time
immemorial men in thinking, speaking, and acting had taken the uniformity and immutability of the logical structure of the human mind
as an unquestionable fact. All scientific inquiry was based on this assumption. In the discussions about the epistemological character of
economics, writers, for the first time in human history, denied this

Introduction

5

proposition too. ~Marxismasserts that a man's thinking is determined
by his class affiliation. Every social class has a logic of its own. The
product of thought cannot be anything else than an "ideological disguise" of the selfish class interests of the thinker. I t is the task of a
"sociology of knowledge" to unmask philosophies and scientific
theories and to expose their "ideological" emptiness. Economics is a
"bourgeois" makeshift, the economists are "sycophants" of capital.
Only the classless society of the socialist utopia will substitute truth
for "ideological" lies.
This polylogism was later taught in various other forms also.
Historicism asserts that the logical structure of human thought and
action is liable to change in the course of historical evolution. Racial
polylogism assigns to each race a logic of its own. Finally there is
irrationalism, contending that reason as such is not fit to elucidate
the irrational forces that determine human behavior.
Such doctrines go far beyond the limits of economics. They question not only economics and praxeology but all other human knowledge and human reasoning in general. They refer to mathematics
and physics as well as t o economics. It seems therefore that the task
of refuting them does not fall to any single branch of knowledge but
to epistemology and philosophy. This furnishes apparent justification for the attitude of those economists who quietly continue their
studies without bothering about epistemological problems and the
objections raised by poIylogism and irrationalism. The physicist does
not mind if somebody stigmatizes his theories as bourgeois, Western
or Jewish; in the same way the economist should ignore detraction
and slander. H e should let the dogs bark and pay no heed to their
yelping. I t is seemly for him to remember Spinoza's dictum: Sane
sicut lux se ipsam et tenebras manifestat, sic veritas norma sui et falsi
est.
However, the situation is not quite the same with regard to economics as it is with mathematics and the natural sciences. Polylogism
and irrationaIism attack praxeology and economics. Although they
formulate their statements in a general way to refer to all branches
of knowledge, it is the sciences of human action that they really have
in view. They say that it is an illusion to believe that scientific research can achieve results valid for people of all eras, races, and social
classes, and they take pleasure in disparaging certain physical and
biological theories as bourgeois or Western. But if the soIution of
practical problems requires the application of tbese stigmatized doctrines, they forget their criticism. The technology of Soviet Russia
utilizes without scruple all the results of bourgeois physics, chemistry,

6

Human Action

and biology just as if they were valid for all classes. The Nazi engineers and physicians did not disdain to utilize the theories, discoveries,
and inventions of people of "inferior" races and nations. The behavior of people of all races, nations, religions, linguistic groups, and
social classes clearly proves that they do not endorse the doctrines
of polylogism and irrationalism as far as logic, mathematics, and
the natural sciences are concerned.
But it is quite different with praxeology and economics. The main
motive for the development of the doctrines of polylogism, historicism, and irrationalism was to provide a justification for disregarding
the teachings of economics in the determination of economic policies.
The socialists, racists, nationalists, and Ctatists failed in their endeavors
to refute the theories of the economists and to demonstrate the correctness of their own spurious doctrines. It was precisely this frustration that prompted them to negate the logical and epistemological
principles upon which all human reasoning both in mundane activities
and in scientific research is founded.
It is not permissible to disposc of these objections merely on the
ground of the political motives which inspired them. N o scientist is
entitled to assume beforehand that a disapprobation of his theories
must be unfounded because his critics are imbued by passion and party
bias. He is bound to reply to every censure without any regard to
its underlying motives or its background. It is no less impermissible
to keep silent in the face of the often asserted opinion that the theorems
of economics are valid only under hypothetical assumptions never
realized in life and that they are therefore useless for the mental grasp
of reality. It is strange that some schools seem to approve of this
opinion and nonetheless quietly proceed to draw their curves and to
formulate their equations. They do not bother about the meaning of
their reasoning and about its reference to the world of real life and
action.
The first task of every
.This. is, of course, an untenable attitude.
sc:ent:f c i x y i y Is the
description and defiiiitioii of a!!
conditions and assumptions under which its various statements claim
validity. It is a mistake to set up physics as a model and pattern for
economic research. But those committed to this fallacy should have
learned one thing at least: that no physicist ever believed that the
clarification of some of the assumptions and conditions of physical
theorems is outside the scope of physical research. The main question
that economics is bound to answer is what the relation of its statements is to the reality of human action whose mental grasp is the
objective of economic studies.

Introduction

7

It therefore devolves upon economics to deal thoroughly with the
assertion that its teachings are valid only for the capitalist system of
the shortlived and already vanished liberal period of Western civilization, I t is incumbent upon no branch of learning other than economics
to examine all the objections raised from various points of view against
the usefulness of the statements of economic theory for the elucidation of the problems of human action. The system of economic
thought must be built up in such a way that it is proof against any
criticism on the part of irrationalism, historicism, panphysicalism,
behaviorism, and all varieties of polylogism. It is an intolerable state
of affairs that while new arguments are daily advanced to demonstrate the absurdity and futility of the endeavors of economics, the
economists pretend to ignore all this.
It is no longer enough to deal with the economic problems within
the traditional framework. It is necessary t o build the theory of
cataIlactics upon the soiid foundation of a general theory of human
action, praxeology. This procedure will not only secure it against
many fallacious criticisms but clarify many problems hitherto not
even adequately seen, still less satisfactorily solved. There is, especially, the fundamental problem of economic calculation.

3 . Economic Theory and the Practice of Human Action
It is customary for many people to blame economics for being
backward. Now it is quite obvious that our economic theory is not
perfect. There is no such thing as perfection in human knowledge, nor
for that matter in any other human achievement. Omniscience is
denied to man. The most elaborate theory that seems to satisfy completely our thirst for knowledge may one day be amended or sup$anted by a new theory. Science does not give us absolute and
final certainty. I t only gives us assurance within the limits of our
mental abilities and the prevailing state of scientific thought. A scientific system is but one station in an endlessly progressing search for
knowledge. It is necessarily affected by the insufficiency inherent in
every human effort. But to acknowledge these facts does not mean
that present-day economics is backward. It merely means that economics is a living thing-and to live implies both imperfection and
change.
The reproach of an alleged backwardness is raised against economics
from two different points of view.
There are on the one hand some naturalists and physicists who
censure economics for not being a natural science and not applying the

8
Human Action
methods and procedures of the laboratory. It is one of the tasks of
this treatise to explode the fallacy of such ideas. In these introductory
remarks it may be enough to say a few words about their psychological background. It is common with narrow-minded people to
reflect upon every respect in which other people differ from themselves. The camel in the fable takes exception to all other animals for
not having a hump, and the Ruritanian criticizes the Laputanian for
not being a Ruritanian. The research worker in the laboratory considers it as the sole worthy home of inquiry, and differential equations
as the only sound method of expressing the results of scientific
thought. H e is simply incapable of seeing the epistemological problems
of human action. For him economics cannot be anything but a form
of mechanics.
Then there are people who assert that something must be wrong
with the social sciences because social conditions are unsatisfactory.
The natural sciences have achieved amazing results in the last two
or three hundred years, and the practical utilization of these results
has succeeded in improving the general standard of living to an unprecedented extent. But, say these critics, the socia1 sciences have
utterly failed in the task of rendering social conditions more satisfactory. They have not stamped out misery and starvation, economic
crises and unemployment, war and tyranny. They are sterile and have
contributed nothing to the promotion of happiness and human welfare.
These grumblers do not realize that the tremendous progress of
technological methods of production and the resulting increase in
wealth and welfare were feasible only through the pursuit of those
liberal policies which were the practical application of the teachings
of economics. I t was the ideas of the classical economists that removed
the checks imposed by age-old laws, customs, and prejudices upon
technological improvement and freed the genius of reformers and
innovators from the straitjackets of the guilds, government tutelage,
and sociai pressure of various kinds. It was they that reduced the
prestige of conquerors and expropriators and demonstrated the social
benefits derived from business activity. None of the great modern
inventions would have been put to use if the mentality of the precapitalistic era had not been thoroughly demolished by the economists.
What is commonly called the "industrial revolution" was an offspring
of the ideological revolution brought about by the doctrines of the
economists. The economists exploded the old tenets: that it is unfair
and unjust to outdo a competitor by producing better and cheaper

goods; that it is iniquitous to deviate from the traditional methods
of production; that machines are an evil because they bring about
unemployment; that it is one of the tasks of civil government to
prevent efficient businessmen from getting rich and to protect the
less efficient against the competition of the more efficient; that to
restrict the freedom of entrepreneurs by government compulsion or
by coercion on the part of other social powers is an appropriate means
to promote a nation's well-being. British political economy and French
Physiocracy were the pacemakers of modern capitalism. It is they
that made possible the progress of the natural sciences that has heaped
l~enefitsupon the masses.
What is wrong with our age is precisely the widespread ignorance
of the role which these policies of economic freedom played in the
technical evolution of the last two hundred years. People fell prey
to the fallacy that the improvement of the methods of production
was contemporaneous with the policy of laissez faire only by accident. Deluded by Marxian myths, they consider modern industrialism an outcome of the operation of mysterious L L p r o d ~ c t i ~
forces"
e
that do not depend in any tvalr on ideological factors. Classical economics, they believe, was not-a factor in the rise of capitalism, but
rather its product, its "ideological superstructure," i.e., a doctrine
designed to defend the unfair claims of the capitalist exploiters. Hence
the abolition of capitalism and the substitution of socialist totalitarianism for a market economy and free enterprise would not impair the
further progress of technology. It would, on the contrary, promote
technological improvement by removing the obstacles which the
selfish interests of the capitalists place in its way.
The characteristic feature of this age of destructive wars and social
disintegration is the revolt against economics. Thomas Carlyle branded
economics a "dismal science," and Karl Marx stigmatized the economists as "the sycophants of the bourgeoisie." Quacks-praising their
patent medicines and short cuts to the earthly paradise-take pleasure
in scorning economics as "orthodox" and "reactionary." Demagogues
pride themselves on what they call their victories over economics.
The "practical" man boasts of his contempt for economics and his
ignorance of the teachings of "armchair" economists. The economic
policies of the last decades have been the outcome of a mentality
that scoffs at any variety of sound economic theory and glorifies the
spurious doctrines of its detractors. What is called "orthodox" economics is in most countries barred from the universities and is
virtually unknown to the leading statesmen, politicians, and writers.

10

Hzmzan Action

The blame for the unsatisfactory state of economic affairs can certainly not be placed upon a science which both rulers and masses
despise and ignore.
It must be emphasized that the destiny of modern civilization as
developed by the white peoples in the last two hundred years is inseparably linked with the fate of economic science. This civilization
was able to spring into existence because the peoples were dominated
by ideas which were the application of the teachings of economics to
the problems of economic policy. It will and must perish if the
nations continue to pursue the course which they entered upon under
the spell of doctrines rejecting economic thinking.
It is true that economics is a theoretical science and as such abstains
from any judgment of valuc. It is not its task to tell pcople what ends
they should aim at. It is a science of the means to be applied for the
attainment of ends chosen, not, to be sure, a science of the choosing
of ends. Ultimate decisions, the valuations and the choosing of ends,
are beyond the scopc of any science. Science never tells a man how
he should act; it merely shows how a man must act if he wants to attain definite ends.
It seems to many people that this is very little indeed and that a
scicnce limited to thc investigation of the is and unable to express
a judgment of value about the highest and ultimate ends is of no importance for life and action. This too is a mistake. However, the exposure of this mistake is not a task of thcse introductory remarks. I t
is one of the ends of the treatise itself.

It was necessary to make these preliminary remarks in order to
cxplain why this treatise places economic problems within the broad
frame of a general theory of human action. At the present stage both
of economic thinking and of political discussions concerning the
fundamental issues of social organization, it is no longer feasible to
isolate the treatment of catallactic problems proper. These problems
are only a segmcnt of a general science of human action and must be
dealt with as such.

Part One

Human Action

I. ACTING MAN

r . Purposeful Action and Animal Reaction
UMAN action is purposeful behavior. Or we may say: Action is

H

will put into operation and transformed into an agency, is aiming at ends and goals, is the ego's meaningful response to stimuli and
to the conditions of its environment, is a person's conscious adjustment to the state of the universe that determines his life. Such paraphrases may clarify the definition given and prevent possible misinterpretations. But the definition itself is adequate and does not need
complement or commentary.
Conscious or purposeful behavior is in sharp contrast to unconscious behavior, i.e., the refiexes and the involuntary responses of
the body's cells and nerves to stimuli. People are sometimes prepared to believe that the boundaries between conscious behavior
and the involuntary reaction of the forces operating within man's
body are more or less indefinite. This is correct only as far as it is
sometimes not easy to establish whether concrete behavior is to be
considered voluntary or involuntary. But the distinction between
consciousness and unconsciousness is nonetheless sharp and can be
clearly determined.
The unconscious behavior of the bodily organs and cells is for
the acting ego no less a datum than any other fact of the external
world. Acting man must take into account all that goes on within
his own body as well as other data, e.g., the weather or the attitudes
of his neighbors. There is, of course, a margin within which purposeful behavior has the power to neutraIize the working of bodily
factors. It is feasible within certain limits to get the body under control. Man can sometimes succeed through the power of his will in
overcoming sickness, in compensating for the innate or acquired insufficiency of his physical constitution, or in suppressing reflexes. As
far as this is possible, the field of purposeful action is extended. If a
man abstains from controlling the involuntary reaction of cells and
nerve centers, although he would be in a position to do so, his behavior is from our point of view purposeful.
The field of our science is human action, not the psychological

Human Action
events which result in an action. It is precisely this which distinguishes
the general theory of human action, praxeology, from psychology.
The theme of psychology is the internal events that result or can
result in a definite action. T L ~theme of praxeoIogy is action as such.
This also settles the relation of praxeology to the psychoanalytical
concept of the subconscious. Psychoanalysis too is psychology and
does not investigate action but the forces and factors that impel a
man toward a definite action. The psychoanalytical subconscious is
a psychological and not a praxeological category. Whether an action
stenk from clear deliberation, or from forgotten memories and suppressed desires which from submerged regions, as it were, direct the
wilI, does not influence the nature of the action. The murderer
whom a subconscious urge (the Id) drives toward his crime and the
neurotic whose aberrant behavior seems to be simply meaningless to
an untrained observer both act; they like anybody else are aiming
at certain ends. It is the merit of psychoanalysis that it has demonstrated that even the behavior of neurotics and psychopaths is meaningful, that they too act and aim at ends, aIthough we who consider
ourselves normal and sane call the reasoning determining their choice
of ends nonsensical and the means they choose for the attainment of
these ends contrary to purpose.
T h e term "unconscious" as used by praxeology and the term "subconscious" as applied by psychoanalysis belong to two different
systems of thought and research. ~ ~ a x e o l ono
g ~less than other
branches of knowledge owes much to psychoanalysis. T h e more
necessary is it then to become aware of the line which separates
praxeology from psychoanalysis.
Action is not simply giving preference. Alan also show-s preference
in situations in which things and events are unavoidable or are believed to be so. Thus a man may prefer sunshine to rain and Inav wish
that the sun would dispel the clouds. H e who only wishes and hopes
does not interfere actively with the course of events and wjth the
shaping of his own destiny. But acting man chooses, determines, and
tries to reach an end. Of two things both of which he cannot have
together he selects one and gives up the other. Action therefore always involves both taking and renunciation.
T o express wishes and hopes and to announce planned action
may be forms of action in so far as they aim in themselves at the
realization of a certain purpose. But they-must not be confused with
the actions to which they refer. They are not identical with the
actions they announce, recommend, or reject. Action is a real thing.
What counts is a man's total behavior, and not his talk about planned

Acting Man

13

but not realized acts. On the other hand action must be clearly distinguished from the application of labor. Action means the employment of means for the attainment of ends. As a rule one of the
means employed is the acting man's labor. But this is not always the
case. Under special conditions a word is all that is needed. H e who
gives orders or interdictions may act without any expenditure of
labor. T o talk or not to talk, to smile or to remain serious, may be
action. T o consume and to enjoy are no less action than to abstain
from accessible consumption and enjoyment.
Praxeology consequently does not distinguish between "active"
or energetic and "passive" or indolent man. The vigorous man industriously striving for the improvement of his condition acts neither
more nor less than the lethargic man who sluggishly takes things as
they come. For to do nothing and to bc idle are also action, they too
determine the course of events. Wherever the conditions for human
interference are present, man acts no matter whether he interferes
or refrains from interfering. He who endures what he could change
acts no less than he who interferes in order to attain another result.
A man who abstains from influencing the operation of physiological
and instinctive factors which he could influence also acts. Action is
not only doing but no less omitting to do what possibly could be done.
We may say that action is the manifestation of a man's will. But
this would not add anything to our knowledge. For the term will
means nothing else than man's faculty to choose between different
states of affairs, to prefer one, to set aside the other, and to behave according to the decision made in aiming at the chosen state and forsaking the other.
2.

T h e Prerequisites of Human Action

W e call contentment or satisfaction that state of a human being
which does not and cannot result in any action. Acting man is eager
to substitute a more satisfactory state of affairs for a less satisfactory.
His mind imagines conditions which suit him better, and his action
aims at bringing about this desired state. The incentive that impels
a man to act is always some uneasiness? A man perfectly content
with the state of his affairs would have no incentive to change things.
He would have neither wishes nor desires; he would be perfectly
happy. He would not act; he would simply live free from care.
I . Cf. Locke, A n Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Fraser (Oxford, 18gq), 1, 331-333; Leibniz, Nouveaux enais s74r l'entendement humain, ed.
Flammarion, p. 1I 9.

14
Human Action
But to make a man act, uneasiness and the image of a more satisfactory state alone are not sufficient. A third condition is required: the
expectation that purposeful behavior has the power t o remove or at
least t o alleviate the felt uneasiness. In the absence of this condition
no action is feasible. Man must yield t o the inevitable. H e must submit t o destiny.
These are the general conditions of human action. Man is the being
that lives under these conditions. H e is not only homo sapiens, but
no less homo agens. Beings of human descent who either from birth
or from acquired defects are unchangeably unfit f o r any action (in
the strict sense of the term and not only in the legal sense) are practically not human. Although the statutes and biology consider
them t o be men, they lack the essential featurc of humanity. T h e
newborn child too is not an acting being. It has not yet gone the
whole way from conception t o the full development of its human
qualities. But at the end of this evolution it becomes an acting
being.

On Happiness
In colloquial speech we call a man "happy" who has succeeded in attaining his ends. A more adequate description of his state would be that he
is happier than he was before. There is however no valid objection to a
usage that defines human action as the striving for happiness.
But we must avoid current misunderstandings. The ultimate goal of
human action is always the satisfaction of the acting man's desire. There is
no standard of greater or lesser satisfaction other than individual judgments
of value, different for various people and for the same people a t various
times. What makes a man feel uneasy and less uneasy is established by him
from the standard of his own will and judgment, from his personal and
subjective valuation. Nobody is in a position to decree what should make
a fellow man happier.
T o establish this fact does not refer in any way to the antitheses of egoism
and altruism, of materialism and idealism, of individualism and collectivism, of atheism and religion. There are people whose only aim is to improve
the condition of their own ego. There are other people with whom awareness of the troubles of their fellow men causes as much uneasiness as or
even more uneasiness than their own wants. There are people who desire
nothing else than the satisfaction of their appetites for sexual intercourse,
food, drinks, fine homes, and other material things. But other men care
more for the satisfactions commonly called "higher" and "ideal." There
are individuals eager to adjust their actions to the requirements of social
cooperation; there are, on the other hand, refractory people who defy the
rules of social life. There are people for whom the ultimate goal of the
earthly pilgrimage is the preparation for a life of bliss. There are other

Acting Man

15

people who do not believe in the teachings of any religion and do not allow
their actions t o be influenced by them.
Praxeology is indifferent to the ultimate goals of action. Its findings are
valid for all kinds of action irrespective of the ends aimed at. It is a science
of means, not of ends. It applies the term happiness in a purely formal
sense. In the praxeological terminology the proposition: man's unique aim
is to attain happiness, is tautological. It does not imply any statement about
the state of affairs from which man expects happiness.
The idea that the incentive of human activity is always some uneasiness
and its aim always to remove such uneasiness as far as possible, that is, to
make the acting men feel happier, is the essence of the teachings of Eudaemonism and Hedonism. Epicurean Brapa& is that state of perfect happiness and contentment at which all human activity aims without ever
wholly attaining it. In the face of the grandeur of this cognition it is of
little avail only that many representatives of this philosophy failed to recognize the purely formal character of the notions pain and pleasure and
gave them a material and carnal meaning. The theological, mystical, and
other schools of a heteronomous ethic did not shake the core of Epicureanism because they could not raise any other objection than its neglect of the
"higher" and "nobler" pleasures. It is true that the writings of many earlier
champions of Eudaemonism, Hedonism, and Utilitarianism are in some
points open to misinterpretation. But the language of modern philosophers
and still more that of the modern economists is so precise and straightforward that no misinterpretation can possibly occur.

On Instincts and Inzpulses
One does not further the comprehension of the fundamental problem
of human action by the methods of instinct-sociology. This school classifies the various concrete goals of human action and assigns to each class a
special instinct as its motive. Man appears as a being driven by various innate instincts and dispositions. It is assumed that this explanation demolishes once for all the odious teachings of economics and utilitarian ethics.
However, Feuerbach has already justly observed that every instinct is an
instinct to happines~.~
The method of instinct-psychology and instinctsociology consists in an arbitrary classification of the immediate goals of
action and in a hypostasis of each. Whereas praxeology says that the goal
of an action is to remove a certain uneasiness, instinct-psychology says it
is the satisfaction of an instinctive urge.
Many champions of the instinct school are convinced that they have
proved that action is not determined by reason, but stems from the profound depths of innate forces, impulses, instincts, and dispositions which
are not open to any rational elucidation. They are certain they have succeeded in exposing the shallowness of rationaIisrn and disparage economics
2.

231.

Cf. Feuerbach, Simmtliche Werke, ed. Bolin and Jodl (Stuttgart, 19071,X,

Human Action
as "a tissue of false conc1usions drawn from false psychological assumptions." Yet rationalism, praxeology, and economics do not deal with the
ultimate springs and goals of action, but with the means applied for the
attainment of an end sought. However unfathomable the depths may be
from which an impulse or instinct emerges, the means which man chooses
for its satisfaction are determined by a rational consideration of expense
and success.
He who acts under an emotional impulse also acts. What distinguishes
an emotional action from other actions is the valuation of input and output.
Emotions disarrange valuations. Inflamed with passion man sees the goal
as more desirable and the price he has to pay for it as less burdensome than
he would in cool deliberation. Men have never doubted that even in the
state of emotion means and ends are pondered and that it is possible to influence the outcome of this deliberation by rendering more costly the
yielding to the passionatc impulse. T o punish criminal offenses committed
in a state of emotional excitement or intoxication more mildly than other
offenses is tantamount to encouraging such excesses. T h e threat of severe
retaliation does not fail to deter even people driven by seemingly irresistible passion.
W e interpret animal behavior on the assumption that the animal yields
to the impulse which prevails at the moment. As we observe that the
animal feeds, cohabits, and attacks other animals or men, we speak of its
instincts of nourishment, of reproduction, and of aggression. W e assume
that such instincts are innate and peremptorily ask for satisfaction.
But it is different with man. Man is not a being who cannot help yielding
to the impulse that most urgently asks for satisfaction. Man is a being capable of subduing his instincts, emotions, and impulses; he can rationalize
his behavior. H e renounces the satisfaction of a burning impulsc in order
to satisfy other desires. H e is not a puppet of his appetites. A man does not
ravish every female that stirs his senses; he does not devour every piece of
food that entices him; he does not knock down every fellow he would like
to kill. H e arranges his wishes and desires into a scale, he chooses; in short,
he acts. What distinguishes man from beasts is precisely that he adjusts his
behavior deliberatively. Man is the being that has inhibitions, that can
master his impulses and desires, that has the power to suppress instinctive
desires and impulses.
It may happen that an impulse emerges with such vehemence that no
disadvantage which its satisfaction may cause appears great enough to prevent the individual from satisfying it. In this case too there is choosing.
Man decides in favor of yielding to the desire c ~ n c e r n e d . ~
3. Cf. WilIiam .McDougall, A n lntrodzution t o Social Psychology (14th ed.
Boston, 1921),p. 11.
4. In such cases a great role is played by the circumstance that the two satisfactions concerned-that expected from yielding to the impulse and that expected from the avoidance of its undesirable consequences-are not contemporaneous. Cf. below, pp. 476487.

Acting Man

17

3. H u m a n Action as a n Cltimate Given
Since time immemorial men have been eager to know the prime
mover, the cause of all being and of all change, thc ultimatc substance
from which everything stems and which is the cause of itself. Science
is more modest. It is awarc of the limits of the human mind and of
the human search for know-ledge. It aims at tracing back every
phenomenon to its cause. But it rcalizes that these endeavors must
necessarily strike against insurmountable walls. There are phenomena
which cannot be analyzed and traced back to other phenomcna. They
arc the ultimate given. T h e progress of scientific research may succeed in demonstrating that something previously considered as an
ultimate given can be reduced to components. But there will always
be somc irreducible and unanalyzable phenomena, some ultimate
given.
Monism teaches that there is but one ultimate substance, dualism
that there are two, pluralism that there are many. There is no point
in quarreling about these problems. Such metaphysical disputes are
internlinablc. T h e present state of our knowledge does not provide
the means to solve them with an answer which cvery reasonable man
must consider satisfactory.
Materialist monism contends that human thoughts and volitions are
the product of the operation of bodily organs, the cells of the brain
and the nerves. Human thought, will, and action are soIely brought
about b y material processes which onc day will be completely explained b y the methods of physical and chemical inquiry. This too is
a metaphysical hypothesis, although its supporters consider it as an
unshakable and undeniable scientific truth.
Various doctrines have been advanced to explain the relation between mind and bodv. T h e y are mere surmiscs without any reference
to observed facts. All that can be said with certainty is that there are
relations between mental and physiological processes. With regard
to the nature and operation of this connection we know Iittle if anything.
Concrete value judgments and definite human actions are not
open t o further analysis. W e may fairly assume or believe that they
are absolutcly dependent upon and conditioned b y their causes. But
as long as we do not know how external facts-physical and phvsiological-produce in a human mind definite thoughts and volitions
resdting in concrcte acts, we have to face an insurmountable methodological dualism. In thc present state of our knowledge the fundamental statements of positivism, monism and panphysicaIism are

18

Human Action

mere metaphysical postulates devoid of any scientific foundation
and both meaningless and useIess for scientific research. Reason and
experience show us two separate realms: the external world of physical, chemical, and physiological phenomena and the internal world
of thought, feeling, valuation, and purposeful action. N o bridge connects-as far as we can see today-these two spheres. Identical external events result sometimes in different human responses, and
different external events produce sometimes the same human response.
W e do not know why.
In the face of this state of affairs wc cannot help withholding judgment on the essential statements of monism and materialism. W e may
or may not believe that the natural sciences will succeed one day in
explaining the production of definite ideas, judgments of value, and
actions in the same way in which they explain the production of a
chemical compound as the necessary and unavoidable outcome of
a certain combination of elements. In the meantime we are bound to
acquiesce in a methodological dualism.
Human action is one of the agencies bringing about change. I t
is an element of cosmic activity and becoming. Therefore it is a legitimate object of scientific investigation. As-at least under present conditions-it cannot be traced back to its causes, it must be considered
as an ultimate given and must be studied as such.
It is true that the changes brought about by human action are
but trifling when compared with the effects of the operation of the
great cosmic forces. From the point of view of ctcrnity and the infinite universe man is an infinitesimal speck. But for man human action
and its vicissitudes are the real thing. Action is the essence of his
nature and existence, his means of preserving his life and raising himself above the level of animals and plants. However perishable and
evanescent all human efforts may be, for man and for human science
they are of primary importance.

4. Rationality and Trrationaiity; Subjectivism
and Objectivity of Praxeological Research
Human action is necessarily always rational. T h e term "rational
action" is therefore pleonastic and must be rejected as such. When
applied to the ultimate ends of action, the terms rational and irrational are inappropriate and meaningless. T h e ultimate end of
action is always the satisfaction of some desires of the acting man.
Since nobody is it1 a position to substitute his own value judgments
for those of the acting individual, it is vain to pass judgment on other

Acting Man

19

people's aims and volitions. N o man is qualified to declare what would
make another man happier o r less discontented. T h e critic either tells
us what he believes he would aim at if he were in the place of his fellow; or, in dictatoria1 arrogance blithely disposing of his fellow's wilI
and aspirations, declarcs what condition of this other man would better
suit himself, the critic.
It is usual to call an action irrational if it aims, at the expense of
"material" and tangible advantages, at the attainment of "ideal" o r
"higher" satisfactions. In this sense people say, for instance-sometinles with approvaI, sometimes with disapproval-that a man who
sacrifices life, health, or wealth to the attainment of "higher" goodslike fidelity to his religious, philosophical, and political convictions
or the freedom and flowering of his nation-is motivated b y irrational
considerations. Howcvcr, the striving after these higher ends is neither
more nor less rational o r irrational than that after other human ends.
I t is a mistake to assume that the desire to procurc the bare necessities
of life and health is more rational, natural, or justified than the striving
after other goods or amenities. I t is true that the appetite for food and
warmth is common to mcn and other mammals and that as a rule a
man who lacks food and shelter concentrates his efforts upon the
satisfaction of these urgcnt needs and does not care much for other
things. The impulse to live, to preserve one's own Iife, and to take
advantage of every opportunity of strengthening one's vital forces
is a primal feature of life, present in every living being. However, to
yield to this impulse is not-for man-an inevitable necessity.
While all other animals are unconditionally driven b y the impulse
t o preserve their own lives and by the impulse of prolification, man
has the power to master even these impulses. H e can control both
his sexual desires and his will to live. H e can give up his Iife when
the conditions under which alone he could presave it scan intolerable. Man is capable of dying for a cause o r of committing
suicide. T o live is for man the outcome of a choice, of a judgment
of value.
It is the same with the desire to live in affluence. T h e very existence
of ascetics and of men who renounce material gains for the sake of
clinging to their convictions and of preserving their dignity and selfrespect is cvidence that the striving after more tangible amenities is
not inevitable but rather the result of a choice. Of course, the immense majority prefer life to death and wealth to poverty.
It is arbitrary to consider only the satisfaction of the body's physiological needs as "natural" and therefore "rational" and everything
else as "artificial" and therefore "irrational." I t is the characteristic:

2o

Human Action

feature of human nature that man seeks not only food, shelter, and
cohabitation like all other animals, but that he aims also at other kinds
of satisfaction. Man has specifically human desires and needs which
we may call "higher" than those which he has in common with the
other mammals."
When applied to the means chosen for the attainment of ends, the
terms rational and irrational imply a judgment about the expediency
and adequacy of the procedure employed. The critic approves or disapproves of the method from the point of view of whether or not
it is best suited to attain the end in question. It is a fact that human
reason is not infallible and that man very often errs in selecting and
applying means. An action unsuited to the end sought falls short of
expectation. It is contrary to purpose, but it is rational, i.e., the
outcome of a reasonable-although faulty-deliberation and an attempt-although an ineffectual atternpt-to attain a definite goal.
'The doctors who a hundred years ago employed certain methods
for the treatment of cancer which our contemporary doctors reject
were-from the point of view of present-day pathology-badly instructed and therefore inefficient. But they did not act irrationalIy;
they did their best. It is probable that in a hundred years more doctors
will have more efficient methods at hand for the treatment of this
disease. They will be more efficient but not more rational than our
physicians.
T h e opposite of action is not irrational behavior, but a reactive response to stimuli on the part of the bodily organs and instincts which
cannot be controlled by the volition of the person concerned. T o the
same stimulus man can under certain conditions respond both by
reactive response and by action. If a man absorbs a poison, the organs
react by setting up their forces of antidotal defense; in addition, action
may interfere by applying counterpoison.
With regard to the problem involved in the antithesis, rational
and irrational, there is no difference between the natural sciences
and rhe social sciences. Science always is arid must be rathiid. It is
the endeavor to attain a mental grasp of the phenomena of the universe by a systematic arrangement of thc whole body of available
knowledge. However, as has been pointed out above, the analysis of
objects into their constituent elements must sooner or later necessarily reach a point beyond which it cannot go. T h e human mind is
not kven capable of conceiving a kind of knowledge not limited by
5. On the errors involved in the iron law of wages see below, pp. 6 0 1 4 o z ;on the
misunderstanding of the Malthusian theory see below, pp. 663-669.

Acting Man
an ultimate given inaccessible to further analysis and reduction.
The scientific method that carries the mind up to this point is entirely
rational. The ultimate given may be calIed an irrational fact.
It is fashionable nowadays to find fault with the social sciences for
being purely rational. The most popular objection raised against economics is that it neglects the irrationality of life and reality and tries
to press into dry rational schemes and bloodless abstractions the infinite variety of phenomena. No censure could be more absurd. Like
every branch of knowledge economics goes as far as it can be carried
by rational methods. Then it stops by establishing the fact that it is
faced with an ultimate given, ix., a phenomenon which cannot-at
least in the present state of our knowledge-be further a n a l y ~ e d . ~
The teachings of praxeology and economics are valid for every
human action without regard to its underlying motives, causes, and
goals. The ultimate judgments of vaIue and the ultimate ends of human
action are given for any kind of scientific inquiry; they are not open
to any further analysis. Praxeology deals with the ways and means
chosen for the attaiknent of such ultimate ends. Its object is means,
not ends.
In this sense we speak of the subjectivism of the general science of
human action. I t takes the ultimate ends chosen by acting man as data,
it is entirely neutral with regard to them, and it refrains from passing
any value judgments. The only standard which it applies is whether
or not the means chosen are fit for the attainment of the ends aimed
at. If Eudaemonism says happiness, if Utilitarianism and economics
say utility, we must interpret these terms in a subjectivistic way as
that which acting man aims at because it is desirable in his eyes. It is
in this formalism that the progress of the modern meaning of
Eudaemonism, Hedonism, and Utilitarianism consists as opposed to
the older material meaning and the progress of the modern subjectivistic theory of value as opposed to the objectivistic theory of value as
expounded by classical political economy. At the same time it is in
this subjectivism that the objectivity of-our science lies. Because it
is subjectivistic and takes the value judgments of acting man as ultimate data not open to any further critical examination, it is itself
above all strife of parties and factions, it is indifferent to the conflicts of all schools of dogmatism and ethical doctrines, it is free from
valuations and preconceived ideas and judgments, it is universally
valid and absolutely and plainly human.
6. W e shall see later (pp. 49-58) how the empirical social scienccs deal with
the ultimate given.

2.2

Human Action
5. Causality as a Requirement of Action

Man is in a position to act because he has the abiIity to discover
causal relations which determine change and becoming in the universe. Acting requires and presupposes the category of causality.
Only a man who sees the world in the light of causality is fitted t o
act. In this sense we may say that causality is a category of action.
The category means and ends presupposes the category cause and
effect. In a world without causality and regularity of phenomena
there would be no field for human reasoning and human action. S,uch
a world would be a chaos in which man would be at a loss to find any
orientation and guidance. Adan is not even capable of imagining the
conditions of such a chaotic universe.
Where man does not see any causal relation, he cannot act. This
statement is not reversible. Even when he knows the causal relation involved, man cannot act if he is not in a position to influence the cause.
T h e archetype of causality research was: where and how must I
interfere in order to divert the course of events from the way i t
would go in the absence of my interference in a direction which
better suits my wishes? In this sense man raises the question: who or
what is at the bottom of things? H e searches for the regularity and
the "law," because he wants to interfere. OnIy later was this search
more extensively interpreted by metaphysics as a search after the ultimate cause of being and existence. Centuries were needed to bring
these exaggerated and extravagant ideas back again to the more
modest question of where one must interfere or should one be able to
interfere in order to attain this or that end.
The treatment accorded t o the problem of causality in the last
decades has been, due to a confusion brought about by some eminent
physicists, rather unsatisfactory. W e may hope that this unpleasant
chapter in the history of philosophy will be a warning to future
philosophers.
I nere are changes whose causes are, at least for the present timc,
unknown to us. Sometimes we succeed in acquiring a partial knowledge so that we are able to say: in 70 per cent of all cases A results
in B, in the remaining cases in C, or even in D, E, F, and so on. In
order to substitute for this fragmentary information more precise
information it would be necessary to break up A into its elements.
As long as this is not achieved, we must acquiesce in a statistical law.
But this does not affect the praxeological meaning of causality. Total
or practical ignorance in some areas does not demolish the category
of causality.
-1

Acting Man

23

The philosophical, epistemological, and metaphysical problems of
causality and of imperfect induction are beyond the scope of praxeology. W e must simply establish the fact that in order to act, man
must knoiv the causal relationship between events, processes, or states
of affairs. And only as far as he knows this relationship, can his action
attain the ends sought. W e are fully aware that in asserting this we
are moving in a circle. For the evidence that we have correctly perceived a causal relation is provided only by the fact that action guided
by this knowledge results in the expected outcome. But we cannot
avoid this vicious circular evidence precisely because causality is a
category of action. And because it is such a category, praxeology cannot help bestowing some attention on this fundamental problem of
philosophy.

6. The Alter Ego
If we are prepared t o take the term causality in its broadest sense,
teleology can be called a variety of causal inquiry. Final causes are
first of all causes. The cause of an event is seen as an action or quasiaction aiming at some end.
Both primitive man and the infant, in a na'ive anthropomorphic
attitude, consider it quite plausible that every change and event is
the outcome of the action of a being acting in the same way as they
themselves do. They believe that animals, plants, mountains, rivers,
and fountains, even stones and celestial bodies, are, like themselves,
feeling, wilIing, and acting beings. Only at a later stage of cultural
development does man renounce these animistic ideas and substitute
the mechanistic world view for them. Mechanicalism proves to be so
satisfactory a principle of conduct that people finally believe it
capable of solving all the problems of thought and scientific research.
Materialism and panphysicalism proclaim mechanicalism as the essence of all knowledge and the experimental and mathematical
methods of the natural sciences as the sole scientific mode of thinking. All changes are to be comprehended as motions subject to the
laws of mechanics.
The champions of mechanicalism do not bother about the still unsolved problems of the logical and epistemological basis of the
principles of causality and imperfect induction. In their eyes these
principles are sound because they work. The fact that experiments in
the laboratory bring about the results predicted by the theories and
that machines in the factories run in the way predicted by technology
proves, they say, the soundness of the methods and findings of modern

24

Human Action

natural science. Granted that science cannot give us truth-and who
knows what truth really means?-at any rate it is certain that it
works in leading us to success.
But it is precisely when we accept this pragmatic point of view
that the emptiness of the panphysicalist dogma becomes manifest.
Science, as has been poinfed out above, has not succeeded in solving
the problems of the mind-body relations. The panphysicalists certainly cannot contend that the procedures they recommend have ever
worked in the field of interhuman relations and of the social sciences.
But it is beyond doubt that the principle according to which an Ego
deals with every human being as if the other were a thinking and acting being like himself has evidenced its usefulness both in mundane life
and in scientific research. It cannot be denied that it works.
lt is beyond doubt that the practice of considering fellow men as
beings who think and act as I, the Ego, do has turned out well; on
the other hand the prospect seems hopeless of getting a similar pragmatic verification for the postulate requiring them to be treated in
the same manner as the objects of the natural sciences. The epistemological problems raised by the comprehension of other people's behavior are no less intricate than those of causality and incomplete
induction. It may be admitted that it is impossible to provide conclusive evidence for the propositions that my logic is the logic of all
other people and by all means absolutely the only human logic and
that the categories of my action are the categories of all other people's
action and by all means absoIutely the categories of all human action.
However, the pragmatist must remember that these propositions
work both in practice and in science, and the positivist must not
overlook the fact that in addressing his fellow men he presupposes
-tacitly and implicitly-the intersubjective validity of logic and
thereby the reality of the realm of the alter Ego's thought and action,
of his eminent human c h a r a ~ t e r . ~
Thinking and acting are the specific human features of man. They
are pecdiar te a! hnzan beifigs. Thev are, b c p x d r n e ~ b e r st h iin~:he
zoological species homo sapiens, the characteristic mark of man as
man. It is not the scope of praxeology to investigate the relation of
thinking and acting. For praxeology it is enough to establish the fact
that there is only one logic that is intelligible to the human mind, and
that there is only one mode of action which is human and comprehensible to the human mind. Whether there are or can be somewhere
other beings-superhuman or subhuman-who think and act in a
7. Cf. Alfred Schiitz, Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt (Vienna, 1932),

p. 18.

Acting Man

25

different way, is beyond the reach of the human mind. W e must restrict our endeavors to the study of human action.
This human action which is inextricably linked with human
thought is conditioned by logical necessity. It is impossible for the
human mind to conceive logical relations at variance with the logical
structure of our mind. It is impossible for the human mind to conceive
a mode of action whose categories would differ from the categories
urhich determine our own actions.
There are for man only two principles available for a mental grasp
of reality, namely, those of teleology and causality. What cannot be
brough; under either of these categories is absolutcIy hidden to the
human mind. An event not open to an interpretation by one of these
two principles is for man inconceivable and mysterious. Change can
be conceived as the outcome either of the operation of mechanistic
causality or of purposeful behavior; for the human mind there is no
third way a~ailable.~
It is true, as has already been mentioned, that
teleology can be viewed as a variety of causality. But the establishment of this fact docs not annul the essential differences between the
two categories.
The panmechanistic world view is committed to a methodological
monism; it acknowledges only mechanistic causality because it attributes to it alone any cogniiive value or at least a higher cognitive
value than to teleology. This is a metaphysical superstition. Both
principles of cognition--causality and teleology-are, owing to the
limitations of human reason, imperfect and do not convey ultimate
knnwledge. Causality leads to a regressus in infiniturn which reason
can never exhaust. Teleology is found wanting as soon as the question is raised of what moves the prime mover. Either method stops
short at an ultimate given which cannot be analyzed and interpreted.
Reasoning and scientific inquiry can never bring full ease of mind,
apodictic certainty, and perfect'cognition of all things. H e who seeks
this must apply to faith and try to quiet his conscience by embracing
a creed or a metaphysical doctrine.
If we do not transcend the realm of reason and experience, we cannot help acknowledging that our fellow men act. W e are not free
to disregard this fact for the sake of a fashionable prcpossession and
an arbitrary opinion. Daily experience proves not only that the sole
suitable method for studying the conditions of our nonhuman environment is provided by the category of causaIitv; it proves no less
convincingly that our fellow men are acting beings as we ourselves
8. Cf. Karel En@, Regrundung der Teleologic als Form des empirischen
Erkennens (Briinn, ~ g j o ) ,pp. 15 A.

26

Human Action

are. For the comprehension of action there is but one scheme of interpretation and analysis available, namely, that provided by the
copnition and analysis of our own purposeful behavior.
T h e problem of the study and analysis of other pcople's action is
in no way connected with the problem of the existence of a soul or
of an imkortal soul. As far as the objections of empiricism, behaviorism, and positivism are directed against any varietv of the soul-theory,
thev are of no avail for our problem. T h e question we have to deal
with is whether it is possible to grasp human action intellectually if
one refuses to comprehend i t as meaningful and purposeful behavior
aiming at the attainment of definite ends. Rehaviorism and positivism
want to apply the methods of the empirical natural sciences to the
realitv of human action. T h e y interpret it as a response to stimuli.
Rut these stimuli themselves are not open to descrintion by the methods of the natural sciences. Every attempt to describe t h e 4 must refer
to the meaning which acting men attach to them. W e may caIl the
offering of a commoditv fo; sale a "stimuius." But what is essential
in such an offer and distinguishes it from other offers cannot be
dcscribed without entering into the mcaning which the acting parties
attribute to the situation. N o dialectical artifice can spirit away the
fact that man is driven by the aim to attain certain ends. I t is this
purposeful behavior-viz., action-that is the subject matter of our
scicncc. W e cannot approach our subject if we disregard the meaning which acting man attaches to the situation, i.c., the given state of
affairs, and to his own behavior with regard to this situation.
I t is not appropriate for the phvsicist to search for final causes because there is no indication that the events which are the subject matter of physics are to be interpreted as the outcome of actions of a
being, aiming at ends in a human way. Nor is it appropriate for the
praxeologist to disregard the operation of the acting being's volition
and intention because they are undoubtedly given facts. If he were
to disregard it, he would cease to study human action. Very oftenbut not aiways-the events concerned-can be investigated both from
the point of view of praxeology and from that of the natural sciences.
But hc who deals with the discharging of a firearm from thc physical
and chemical point of view is not a praxeologist. He neglects the very
problems which the science of purposeful human behavior aims to
clarify.

On the Serviceableness of Instincts
The proof of the fact that only two avenues of approach are available
for human research, causality or teleology, is provided by the problems

Acting ~Man

27

raiscd in rcference to the serviceableness of instincts. There are types of
behavior which on the one hand cannot be thoroughly interpreted with
the causal methods of the natural sciences, but on the other hand cannot
be considered as purposeful human action. In order to grasp such behavior
we are forced to resort to a makeshift. W e assign to it the character of a
quasi-action; we speak of serviceable instincts.
W e obscrve two things: first the inherent tendency of a living organism
to respond to a stimulus according to a regular pattern, and second the
favorable effectsof this kind of behavior for the strengthening or preservation of the organism's vital forces. If we were in a position to interpret
such behavior as the outcome of purposeful aiming at certain ends, we
would call it action and deal with it according to the tcleological methods
of praxcology. But as we found no trace of a conscious mind behind this
behavior, we suppose that an unknown factor-we call it instinct-was
instrumental. W e say that the instinct dirccts quasi-purposeful animal behavior and unconscious but nonetheless serviceable responses of human
muscles and nerves. Yet, the mere fact that we hypostatize the unexplained
element of this behavior as a force and call it instinct does not enlarge our
knowledge. W e must never forget that this word instinct is nothing but a
landmark to indicate a point beyond which we are unable, up to the present
at least, to carry our scientific scrutiny.
Biology has succeeded in discovering a "natural," i.e., mechanistic, explanation for many processes which in carlicr days werc attributed to the
operation of instincts. Nonetheless many others have renlained which cannot be interpreted as mechanical or chemical responses to mechanical or
chemical stimuli. Animals display attitudes which cannot be comprehended
otherwise than through the assumption that a directing factor was operative.
T h e aim of behaviorism t o study human action from without with the
methods of animal psychology is illusory. As far as animal behavior goes
beyond mere physiological processes like breathing and metabolism, it can
only be investigated with the aid of the meaning-concepts cleveIoped by
praxeology. The behaviorist approaches the object of his investigations
with the human notions of purpose and success. H e unwittingly applies to
the subject matter of his studies the human concepts of serviceableness and
perniciousness. H e dcceivcs himself in excluding all verbal reference to
consciousness and aiming at ends. In fact his mind searches everywhere
for ends and measures every attitude with thc yardstick of a garblcd notion
of serviceableness. The science of human behavior-as far as it is not
physiology-cannot abandon rcfercnce to mcaning and purpose. It cannot learn anything from animal psychology and the observation of the unconscious reactions of newborn infants. It is, on the contrary, animal psychology and infant psychology which cannot renounce the aid afforded by
the science of human action. Without praxeological categorics we would
be at a loss to conceive and to understand the behavior both of animals
and of infants.

28

Human Action

T h e observation of the instinctive behavior of animals fills man with
astonishment and raises questions which nobody can answer satisfactorily.
Yet the fact that animals and even plants react in a quasi-purposeful way
is neither more nor less miraculous than that man thinks and acts, that in
the inorganic univcrse those functional correspondcnces prevail which
physics describes, and that in the organic universe biologica1 processes
occur. All this is miraculous in the sense that it is an ultimate given for our
searching mind.
Such an ultimate given is what we call animal instinct. Like the concepts
of motion, force, life, and consciousness, the concept of instinct too is
merely a term to signify an ultimate given. T o be sure, it neither "explains"
anything nor indicates a cause or an ultimate c a ~ s e . ~

The Absolute E n d
In order to avoid any possible misinterpretation of the praxeoIogica1
categories it seems expedient to emphasize a truism.
Praxeology, like the historical sciences of human action, deals with purposeful human action. If it mentions ends, what it has in view is the ends
at which acting men aim. If it speaks of meaning, i t refers to the meaning
which acting men attach t o their actions.
Praxeology and history are manifcstations of the human mind and as
such are conditioned by the intellectual abilities of mortal men. Praxeology
and history do not pretend to know anything about the intentions of an
absolute and objective mind, about an objective meaning inherent in the
course of events and of historical evolution, and about the plans which God
or Nature or Weltgeist or Manifest Destiny is trying to realize in directing
the universe and human affairs. They have nothing in common with what
is called philosophy of history. They do not, like the works of Hegel,
Comte, Marx, and a host of other writers, claim to reveal information
about the true, objective, and absolute mcaning of life and history.

Vegetative M a n
Some philosophies advise man to seek as the ultimate end of conduct the
complete renunciation of any action. They look upon life as an absolute
evil full of pain, suffering, and anguish, and apodictically deny that any
purposeful human effort can render it tolerable. Happiness can be attained
only b y complete extinction of consciousness, volition, and life. The only
way toward bliss and salvation is to become perfectly passive, indifferent,
and inert like the plants. T h e sovereign good is the abandonment of thinking and acting.
Such is the cssence of the teachings of various Indian philosophies,
especially of Buddhism, and of Schopenhauer. Praxeology does not com9. "La vie est une cause prernitke qui nous echappe colnme toutes les causes
remi6res et dont la science expkrimentale n'a pas Q se prkoccuper." Claude
gernard, La Science erpirirnentde (Paris, 1878). p. 137.

Acting Man
ment upon them. It is neutral with regard to all judgments of value and the
choice of ultimate ends. Its task is not to approve or to disapprove, but
only to establish facts.
T h e subject matter of praxeology is human action. It is not concerned
with human beings who have succeeded in suppressing altogether everything that characterizes man as man: will, desire, thought, and the striving
after ends. It deals with acting man, not with man transformed into a plant
and reduced to a merely vegetative existence.

11. THE EPISTEMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF
T H E SCIENCES OF HUMAN ACTION
I.

Praxeology and History

HERE are two main branches of the sciences of

T

human action:

praxeology and history.
History is the collection and systematic arrangement of all data of
experience concerning human action. It deals with the concrete content of human action. It studies all human endeavors in thcir infinite
multiplicity and variety and all individual actions with all their accidental, special, and particular implications. I t scrutinizes the ideas
guiding acting men and the outcome of the actions performed. It
embraces every aspect of human activities. It is on the one hand
general history and on the other hand the history of various narrower fields. There is the history of political and military action, of
ideas and philosophy, of economic activities, of technology, of Iiteraturc, art, and science, of religion, of mores and customs, and of many
other realms of human life. Thcre is ethnology and anthropology,
as far as they are not a part of biology, and there is psychology as
far as it is neither physiology nor epistemology nor philosophy.
There is linguistics as far as it is neither logic nor the physiology of
speech.l
Thc subject matter of all historical sciences is the past. They cannot teach us anything which would be valid for a11 human actions,
that is, for the future too. The study of history makes a inan wise
I. Economic history, descriptive economics, and economic statistics are, o i
course, history. The term sociology is used in two different meanings. Descriptive sociology deals with those historical phenomena of human action which are
not viewed in descriptive economics; it overlaps to some extent the field claimed
by ethnology and anthropology. General sociology, on the other hand, approaches historical experience from a more nearly universal point of view than
that of the other branches of history. History proper, for instance, deals with
an individual town or with towns in a definite period or with an individual
people or with a certain geographical area. Max Weber in his main treatise
(Wirtscbaft und Qeseilschaft [Tiibingen, 19221, pp. 513-600) deals with the
town in general, i.e., with the whole historical experience concerning towns
without any limitation to historical periods, geographical areas, or individual
peoples, nations, races, and civilizations.

Epistemological Problems of Human Action
and judicious. But it does not by itself provide any knowledge and
skill which could be utilized for handling concrete tasks.
The natural sciences too deal with past events. Every experience
is an experience of something passed away; there is no experience of
future happenings. But the experience to which the natural sciences
owe all their success is the experience of the experiment in which
the individual elements of change can be observed in isolation. The
facts amassed in this way can be used for induction, a peculiar procedure of inference which has given pragmatic evidence of its expediency, although its satisfactory epistemological characterization
is still an unsolved problem.
The experience with which the sciences of human action have
to deal is always an experience of complex phenomena. N o laboratory
experiments can be performed with regard to human action. W e are
nevcr in a position to observe the change in one element only, all
other conditions of the event being equal to a case in which the
element concerned did not change. Historical experience as an experience of complex phenomena does not provide us with facts in the
sense in which the natural sciences employ this term to signify isolated
evcnts tcsted in experiments. T h e information conveyed by historical
experience cannot be used as building material for the construction of
theories and the prediction of future events. Every historical experience is open to various interpretations, and is in fact interpreted in
different ways.
The postulates of positivism and kindred schools of tnetaphysics are
therefore illusory. It is impossible to reform thc sciences of human
action according to the pattern of physics and the other natural
scicnccs. There is no means to establish an a posteriori theory of
human conduct and social events. History can neither prove nor
disprove any general statement in the manner in which the natural
sciences accept or reject a hypothesis on the ground of laboratory
experiments. Neither experimental verification nor experimental falsification of a general proposition are possible in this field.
Complex phenomena in the production of which various causal
chains are interlaced cannot test any theory. Such phenomena, on
the contrary, become intelligible only through an interpretation in
tcrms of theories previously developed from other sources. In the
case of naturaI phenomena the interpretation of an event must not be
at variance with the theories satisfactorily verified by experiments. In
the case of historical events there is no such restriction. Commentators
would be free to resort to quite arbitrary explanations. Where there
is something to explain, the human mind has never been at a loss to

Human Action

32

invent ad hoc some imaginary theories, lacking any logical justification.
A limitation similar to that which the experimentally tested theories
enjoin upon the attempts to interpret and elucidate individual physical, chemical, and physiological events is provided by praxeology in
the field of human history. Praxeology is a theoretical and systematic,
not a historical, science. Its scope is human action as such, irrespective
of all environmental, accidental, and individual circumstances of the
concrete acts. Its cognition is purely formal and general without
reference to the material content and the particular features of the
actual case. I t aims at knowledge valid for all instances in which the
conditions exactly correspond to those implied in its assumptions and
inferences. Its statements and propositions are not derived from experience. They are, like those of logic and mathematics, a priori.
They are not subject to verification or faIsification on the ground of
expcricnce and facts. They are both logically and temporally antecedent to any comprehension of historical facts. They are a necessary
requirement of any intellectual grasp of historical events. Without
them we should not be able to see in the course of events anything else
than kalcidoscopic change and chaotic muddle.
2.

T h e Formal and Aprioristic Character of Praxeology

A fashionable tendency in contemporary philosophy is to deny
the existence of any a priori knowledge. ~ 1 1
human knowledge, it is
contended, is derived from experience. This attitude can easily be
understood as an excessive reaction against the extravagances of
theology and a spurious philosophy of history and of nature. Metaphysicians were eager to discover by intuition moral preccpts, the
mcaning of historical evolution, the properties of soul and matter,
: ~ n dthe laws governing physical, chemical, and physiological events.
Their vnlatile peculations manifested n hlithe disregard for matterof-fact Itnowledge. They were convinced that, without reference
to experience, reason could explain all things and answer a11 questions.
The modern natural sciences owe their success to the method of
observation and experiment. There is no doubt that empiricism and
~ra~rnatism
are right as far as they merely describe the procedures
of the natural sciences. But it is no less certain that they are entirelv
n.1-onq in their endeavors to reject any kind of a priori ltnowlcdge and
to characterize lopic, mathematics, and praxeology as empirical and
cx~erimentaldisciplines.
With regard to praxeology the errors of the philosophers are due

Epistemological Problems of Human Action

33

to their complete ignorance of economics and very often to their
shockingly insufficient knowledge of history. In the eyes of the
philosopher the treatment of philosophical issues is a sublime and
noble vocation which must not be put upon the low level of other
gainful employments. The professor resents the fact that he derives
an income from philosophizing; lie is offended by the thought that
he earns money like the artisan and the farm hand. Monetary matters
are mean things, and the philosopher investigating the eminent problems of truth and absolute eternal values should not soil his mind by
paying attention to them. No line of any contemporary philosopher
discloses the least familiarity with even the most elementary problems
of economics.
The problem of whether there are or whether there are not a
priori elements of thought-i.e., necessary and ineluctable intellectual
conditions of thinking, anterior to any actual instance of conception
and experience-must not bc confused with the genetic problem of
how man acquired his characteristically human mental ability. ,Man
is descended from nonhuman ancestors who lacked this abiIity. These
ancestors were endowed with some potentiality which in the course
of ages of evolution converted them into reasonable beings. This
transformation was achieved by the influence of a changing cosmic
environment operating upon succeeding generations. Hence the
empiricist concludes that the fundamental principles of reasoning are
an outcome of experience and represent an adaptation of man to the
conditions of his environment.
This idea leads, when consistently followed, to the further conclusion that there were between our prehunian ancestors and homo
sapiens various intermediate stages. There were beings which, although not yet equipped with the human faculty of reason, were endowed with some rudimentary elements of ratiocination. Theirs was
not pet a logical mind, but a prelogical (or rather imperfectly logical)
mind. Their desultory and defective logical functions evolved step
by step from the preiogicai state toward the iog~calstate. Reason, intellect, and logic are historical phenomena. There is a history of Iogic
as there is a history of technology. Nothing suggests that logic as we
z. Hardly any philosopher had a more universal familiarity with various
branches of contemporary knowIedgc than Bergson. Yet a casual remark in his
Iast great book clearly proves that Bergson was completely ignorant of the
fundamental theorem of the modern theory of value and exchange. Speaking of
exchange he remarks "Yon ne peut le pratiquer sans sl&tredemand6 si les deux
objets CchangCs sont bien de m&me valeur, c'est-;-dire Cchangeables eontre un
m&metroisi6me." (Les Deux Sources de la morale et de la religion [Paris, 19321,
p. 68.)

34

Human Action

know it is the last and final stage of intellectual evolution. Human
logic is a historical phase between prehuman nonlogic on the one
hand and superhuman logic on the other hand. Reason and mind, the
human beings' mobt ehcacious equipment in their struggle for survival, are embedded in the continuous flow of zoological events. They
are neither eternal nor unchangeable. They are transitory.
Furthermore, there is no doubt that every human being repeats in
his personal evolution not only the physiologicaI metamorphosis from
a simple cell into a highly complicated mammal organism but no less
the spiritual metamorphosis from a purely vegetative and animal existence into a reasonable mind. This transformation is not completed
in the prenatal life of the embryo, but only later when the newborn
child step by step awakens to human consciousness. Thus every man
in his early youth, starting from the depths of darkness, proceeds
through various states of the mind's logical structure.
Then there is the case of the animals. W e are fully aware of the
unbridgeable gulf separating our reason from the reactive processes
of their brains and nerves. But at the same time we divine that forces
are desperately struggling in them toward the light of comprchcnsion.
They are like prisoners anxious to break out from the doom of eternal
darkness and inescapable automatism. W e feel with them because
we ourselves are in a similar position: pressing in vain against the
limitation of our intellectual apparatus, striving unavailingly after
unattainable perfect cognition.
But the problem of the a priori is of a different character. It does
not deal with the problem of how consciousness and reason have
emerged. It refers to the essential and necessary character of the
logical structure of the human mind.
The fundamental logical relations are not subject to proof or disproof. Every attempt to prove them must presuppose their validity.
It is impossible to explain them to a being who would not possess them
on his own account. Efforts to define them according to thc rules of
definition must fail. They are primary proposition^ antecedent to
any nominal or real definition. They are ultimate unanalyzable
categories. The human mind is utterly incapable of imagining logical
categories at variance with them. No matter how they may appear to
superhuman beings, they are for man inescapable and absolutely necessary. They are the indispensabk prerequisite of perception, apperception, and experience.
They are no less an indispensable prerequisite of memory. There
is a tendency in the natural sciences to describe memory as an instance
of a more general phenomenon. Every living organism conserpes

Epistemological Problems of Human Action
the effects of earlier stimulation, and the present state of inorganic
matter is shaped by the effects of all the influences to which it was
exposed in the past. T h e present state of the universe is the product
of its past. W e may, therefore, in a loose metaphorical sense, say
that the geological structure of our globe conserves the memory of
all earlier cosmic changes, and that a man's body is the sedimentation
of his ancestors' and his own destinies and vicissitudes. But memory
is something entirely different from the fact of the structural unity
and continuity of cosmic evolution. I t is a phenomenon of consciousness and as such conditioned b y the logical a priori. Psychologists have
been puzzled b y the fact that man does not remember anything from
the time of his existence as an embryo and as a suckling. Freud tried
to explain this absence of recollection as brought about by subconscious suppression of undesired reminiscences. T h e truth is that there
is nothing to be remembered of unconscious states. Animal automatism and unconscious response to physiologicaI stim~ilationsare
neither for cinbryos and sucklings nor for adults material for remembrance. Only conscious states can bc remembered.
T h e human mind is not a tabula rasa on which the external events
write their own history. It is equipped with a set of tools for grasping
reaIity. Man acquired these tools, i.e., the logical structure of his
mind, in the course of his evolution from an amoeba to his present
state. But these tools arc lopically prior to any experience.
Adan is not only an animal totally subject to the stimuli unavoidably
dctcrmining the circumstances of his life. H e is also an acting being.
And the category of action is logically antecedent to any concrete
act.
T h e fact that man does not hare the creative power to imagine
categories at variance with the fundamcntal logical relations and with
the principles of causality and teleology enjoins upon us what may be
called nzethodological apriorism.
Everybody in his daily behavior again and again bears witness to the
1.:1:*--

--J

---:

I:&--

-1 *L- --&

am--

:-a -1 &L

-.--L* --J

IIIIIJJULBLIIIILV i l l l U U I I I V G l X i l J L Y U I LllG L i l L G g U L l C b U I L I I U U g I l L i i l l U ilLLIUI1.

H e who addresses his fellow men, who wants to inform and convince
them, who asks questions and answers other pcoplc's questions, can
proceed in this way only because he can appeal to something common
to all men-namely, the logical structure of human rcason. T h e idea
that A could at the same time be n o n - A or that to prefer A to B could
at the same time be to prefer B to A is simplv inconceivable and absurd to a human mind. W e are not in the poshion to comprehend any
kind of prelogical or metalogical thinking. W e cannot think of a
world without causality and teleology.

36
Human Action
It does not matter for man whether or not beyond the sphere accessible to the human mind there are other spheres in which there
is sorncthing categorially different from human thinking and acting.
No ltnowlcdge from such spheres penetrates to the hunlan mind. It
is idle to ask whether things-in-themselves are different from what
they appear to us, and whether there are worlds which we cannot
divine and ideas which w e cannot comprehend. These are problems
bcyond the scope of human cognition. Human knowledge is conditioned b y the structure of thc human mind. If it chooses human action
as the subject matter of its inquiries, it cannot mean anything else than
thc categories of action which are proper to the human mind and arc
its ~ r o j e c t i o ninto the external world of becoming and change. All
the theorems of praxeology refer only to these categories of action
and are valid only in the orbit of their operation. T h e y do not pretend to convey any information about never dreamed of and unimaginable worlds and relations.
Thus praxeology is human in a double sense. It is human because
it claims for its theorems, within the sphere precisely defined in the
undcrlying assumptions, universal validity for all human action. It
is human moreover because it dcals only with human action and
docs not aspire t o know about nonhuman-whether subhuman o r
superhuman-action.

T h e Alleged Logical Heterogeneity of Primitive Man
It is a general fallacy to believe that the writings of Lucien LCvy-Bruhl
give support to the doctrine that the logical structure of mind of primitive
man was and is categorially different from that of civilized man. On the
contrary, what 1,kvy-Bruhl, on the basis of a careful scrutiny of the entire
ethnological material available, reports about the mental functions of primitive man proves cIearIy that the fundamental logical relations and the
categories of thought and action play in the intellectual activities of savages the same role they play in our own life. The content of primitive man's
thoughts differs from the content of our thoughts, but the formal and
logical structure is common to both.
It is true that Lkvy-Bruhl himself maintains that the mentality of primitive peoples is essentially "mystic and prelogical" in character; primitive
man's collective representations are regulated by the "law of participation"
and are consequently indifferent to the law of contradiction. However,
Lkvy-Bruhl's distinction between prelogical and logical thinking refers to
the content and not to the form and categorial structure of thinking. For
he declares that also among peoples like ourselves ideas and relations between ideas governed by the "law of participation" exist, more or less independently, more or less impaired, but yet ineradicable, side by side, with

Epistemological Problems of Human Action

37

those subject to the law of reasoning. "The prelogical and the mystic are
co-existent with the logical."
LCvy-Bruhl relegates the essentiaI teachings of Christianity to the realm
of the prelogical mind." hTow,many objections can possibly be raised and
have been raised against the Christian doctrines and their interpretation by
theology. But nobody ever ventured to contend that the Christian fathers
and philosophers-among them St. Augustine and St. Thomas-had minds
whose logica1 structure was categorially different from that of our contemporaries. The dispute between a man who believes in miracles and
another who does not refers to the content of thought, not to its logical
form. A man who tries to demonstrate the possibility and reality of
miracles may err. But t o unmask his error is-as the brilliant essays of
Hume and A4ill show-certainly no less logically intricate than to explode
any philosophical or econonlic fallacy.
Explorers and missionaries report that in Africa and Polynesia primitive
man stops short at his earliest perception of things and never reasons if he
can in any way avoid k q u r o p e a n and American educators sometimes
report the same of their students. With regard to the Mossi on the Niger
LCvy-Bruhl quotes a missionary's observation: "Conversation with them
turns only upon women, food, and (in the rainy season) the crops." What
other subjects did many contemporaries and neighbors of Newton, Kant,
and LCvy-Uruhl prefer?
The conclusion to be drawn from IAvy-Bruhl's studies is best expressed
in his ow-n words: "The primitive mind, like our own, is anxious to find
the reasons for what happens, but it does not seek these in the same direction as we do."
A peasant eager to get a rich crop may-according to the content of his
ideas--choose various methods. He may perform some magical rites, he
may embark upon a pilgrimage, he may offer a candle to the image of his
patron saint, or he may empIoy more and better fertilizer. But whatever
he does, it is always action, i.e., the employment of means for the attainment of ends. Magic is in a broader sense a variety of technology. Exorcisnl is a deliberate purposeful action based on a world view which most
of our contemporaries condemn as superstitious and thercfore as inappropriate. But the concept of action does not imply that the action is
guided by a correct theory and a technology prnmising success and that
it attains the end aimed at. It only implies that the performer of the action
believcs that the means applied will produce the desired effect.
No facts provided by ethnology or history contradict the assertion that
3. LCvy-Bruhl, HOW Natives Think, trans. by L. A. Clare (New York, 1932)
p. 386.
4. Ibid., p. 377.
5. 1,Cvy-Bruhl, Primitive Mentality, trans. by L. A. Clare (New York, 1923)
pp. 27-29.
6. Ibid., p. 27.
7. Ibid., p. 437.

Human Action
the logical structure of mind is uniform with all men of all races, ages, and
c~untries.~

3. The A Priori and Reality
Aprioristic reasoning is purely conceptual and deductive. It cannot produce anything else but tautologies and analytic judgments. All
its implications are logically derived from the premises and were already contained in them. Hence, according to a popular objection,
it cannot add anything to our knowledge.
All geometrical theorems are already implied in the axioms. The
concept of a rectangular triangle already implies the theorem of Pythagoras. This theorem is a tautology, its deduction results in an
analytic judgment. nlonetheless nobody would contend that geometry
in general and the theorem of Pythagoras in particular do not enlarge
our knowledge. Cognition from pureIy deductive reasoning is also
creative and opens for our mind access to previously barred spheres.
The significant task of aprioristic reasoning is on the one hand to bring
into relief all that is implied in the categories, concepts, and premises
and, on the other hand, to show what they do not imply. It is its
vocation to render manifest and obvious what was hidden and unknown bef0re.O
In the concept of money all the theorems of monetary theory are
already implied. The quantity theory docs not add to our knowledge
anythmg which is not virtually contained in the concept of money.
It transforms, develops, and unfolds; it only analyzes and is therefore
tautological like the theorem of Pythagoras in relation to the concept of the rectangular triangle. However, nobody would deny the
cognitive value of the quantity theory. T o a mind not enlightened
by economic reasoning it remains unknown. A long line of abortive
attempts to solve the problems concerned shows that it was certainly
not easy to attain the present state of knowledge.
It is not a deficiency of the system of aprioristic science that it does
-- .., -LA C..11 -,.+,-. . . ,C L b a l l L y . LT+,L J -,+-.,LWIILG 't LJ ,aA u u
IIUL
LUIIVGY
LU UJ ~ 1 1 6 L U ~ L
theorems are mental tools opening the approach to a complete grasp
of reality; they are, to be sure, not in themselves already the totality
of factual knowledge about all things. Theory and the comprehension
of living and changing reality are not in opposition to one another.
LU~~AIILIUII

VL

8. Cf. the brilliant statements of Ernst Cassirer, Philosophie der synzbolischen

Formen (Berlin, r 9 2 5 ) , 11, 78.

9. Science, says Meyerson, is "l'acte par lequel nous ramenons l'identique ce
qui nous a, tout d'abord, paru n'stre pas tel." (De I'Explication dans les sciences
[Paris, 19271,P. 154). Cf. also Morris R. Cohen, A Preface to Logic (New York,

~944), pp. 11-14.

Epistemological Problems of H u m a n Action

39

Without theory, the general aprioristic science of human action, there
is no comprehension of thc reality of human action.
The relation between reason and experience has long been one of
the fundamental philosophical problems. Like all other problems of
the critique of knowledge, philosophers have approached it only with
reference to the natural sciences. They have ignored the sciences of
human action. Their contributions have been useless for praxeology.
It is customary in the treatment of the epistemologica1 problems of
economics to adopt one of the solutions suggested for the natural
sciences. Some authors recommend Poincart's conventi~nalisrn.~~
They regard the premises of economic reasoning as a matter of
linguistic or postulational convention.ll Others prefer to acquiesce in
ideas advanced by Einstein. Einstein raises the question: "How can
mathematics, a product of human reason that does not depend on any
experience, so exquisitely fit the objects of reality? Is human reason
able to discover, unaided by experience, through pure reasoning the
features of real things?" And his answer is: "As far as the theorems
of mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain, and as far as they
arc certain, they do not refer to reality." l 2
However, the scicnces of human action differ radically from the naturaI scicnces. -411 authors eager to construct an epistemological system
of the sciences of human action according
- to the pattern of the natural
sciences err lamentably.
The real thing which is the subject matter of praxeology, human
action, stems from the same source as human reasoning. Action and
reason are congeneric and homogeneous; they may even be called
two different aspects of the same thing. That reason has the power
to make clear through pure ratiocination the essential features of
action is a consequence of the fact that action is an offshoot of reason.
The theorems attained by correct praxeological reasoning are not
only perfectly certain and incontestable, like the correct mathematical
theorems. They refer, moreover with the full rigidity of their
apodiccic cerrainty and incontestabiiity to the reaiity of action as
it appears in life and history. Praxeology conveys exact and precise
knowledge of real things.
The starting point of praxeology is not a choice of axioms and a
decision about methods of procedu>e, but reflection about the essence
of action. There is no action in which the praxeological categories
10.

Henri Poincar6, La Science et l'hypothdse (Paris, rg18), p. 69.
Kaufmann, Methodology of the Social Sciences (London, rgjq),

I I . Felix

pp. 4647.

12. Albert Einstein, Geometric und Erfahrung

(Berlin, r g z ~ ) ,p. 3.

40
Human Action
do not appear fulIy and perfectly. There is no mode of action thinkable in which means and ends or costs and proceeds cannot be clearIy
distinguished and precisely separated. There is nothing which only
approximately or incompletely fits the economic category of an
exchange. There are only exchange and nonexchange; and with regard to any exchange all the general theorems concerning exchanges
are valid in their full rigidity and with all their implications. There
are no transitions from exchange to nonexchange or from direct
exchange to indirect exchange. S o experience can ever be had which
would contradict these statements.
Such an experience would be impossible in the first place for the
reason that all experience concerning human action is conditioned by
the praxeological categories and becomes possible only through their
application. If we had not in our mind the schemes provided by praxeological reasoning, we should never be in a position to discern and to
grasp any action. W e would perceive motions, but neither buying nor
selling, nor prices, wage rates, interest rates, and so on. I t is only
through the utilization of the praxeological scheme that we become
able to have an experience concerning an act of buying and selling,
but then independently of the fact of whether or not our senses concomitantly perceive any motions of men and of nonhuman elements
of the external world. Unaided bv praxeoIogica1knowledge we would
never learn anything about media of exchange. If we approach coins
without such preexisting knowledge, we would see in them only
round plates of metal, nothing more. Experience concerning money
requires familiarity with the praxeological category medium of exchnnge.
Experience concerning human action differs from that concerning
natural phenomena in that it requires and presupposes praxeological
Itnowledge. This is why the methods of the natural sciences are inappropriate for the study of praxeology, economics, and history.
In asserting the a p i 0 6 character of praxeolopy we are not drafting
a plan for a f~ltnrenew science different from the traditional sciences
of human action. W e do not maintain that the theoretical science of
human action should be aprioristic, but that it is and always has been
so. Every attempt to reflect upon the problems raised by human action
is necessarily bound to aprioristic reasoning. I t does not make any
difference in this regard whether the men discussing a probIem are
theorists aiming at pure knowledge only or statesmen, politicians,
and regular citizens eager to comprehend occurring changes and to
discover what kind of public policy or private conduct would best
snit their own interests. People may begin arguing about the signif-

Epistemological Problem of Human Action
icance of any concrete experience, the debate inevitably turns away
from the accidental and environmental features of the event concerned to an analysis of fundamental principles, and imperceptibly
abandons any reference to the factual happenings which evoked the
argument. 1he history of the natural sciences is a record of theories
and hypotheses discarded because they were disproved by experience.
Remember for instance the fallacies of older mechanics disproved
by Galileo or the fate of the phlogiston theory. No such case is
recorded by the history of economics. The champions of logically
incompatible theories claim the same events as the proof that their
point of view has been tested by experience. The truth is that the
experience of a complex phenomenon-and there is no other experience in the realm of human action-can always be interpreted on
the ground of various antithetic theories. Whether the interpretation is considered satisfactory or unsatisfactory depends on the appreciation of the theories in question established beforehand on the
ground of aprioristic reasoning.18
History cannot teach us any general rule, principle, or law. There
is no means to abstract from a historical expericnce a posteriori any
theories or theorems concerning human conduct and policies. The
data of history would be nothing but a clumsy accumulation of disconnected occurrences, a heap of confusion, if they could not be
clarified, arranged, and interpreted by systematic praxeological
knowledge.

4. T h e Principle of Methodological Individualism
Praxeology deals with the actions of individual men. It is only in
the further course of its inquiries that cognition of human cooperation is attained and social action is treated as a special case of the more
universal category of human action as such.
This methodological individualism has been vehemently attacked
by various metaphysical schools and disparaged as a nominalistic fallacy. T h e notion of an individual, say the critics, is an empty abstraction. Real man is necessarily always a member of a social whole. It is
even impossible to imagine the existence of a man separated from the
rest of mankind and not connected with society. Adan as man is the
product of a social evohtion. His most eminent feature. reason, could
only emerge within the framework of social mutualit);. There is no
thinking which does not depend on the concepts and notions of
13. Cf. E. P. Cheyney, Law in History and Other Essnys (New York, 1927).

P. 2 7 .

42

Human Actio%

language. But speech is manifestly a social phenomenon. hlan is always the member of a collective. As the whole is both logically and
temporally prior to its parts or ~nembers,the study of the individual
is posterior to the study of society. The only adequate method for the
scientific treatment of human problems is the method of universalism
or collectivism.
Now the controversy whether the whole or its parts are logically
prior is vain. Logically the notions of a whole and its parts are correlative. As logical concepts they are both apart from time.
X o less inappropriate with regard to our problem is the reference
to the antagomsm of realism and nominalism, both these terms being
understood in the meaning which medieval scholasticism attached to
them. It is uncontested that in the sphere of human action social entities have real existence. Nobody ventures to deny that nations, states,
municipalities, parties, rcligious communities, are real factors determining the course of human events. Methodological individualism,
far from contesting the significance of such collective wholes, considers it as one of its main tasks to describe and to analyze their becoming and their disappearing, their changing structures, and their
operation. And it chooses the only method fitted to solve this problem
satisfactorily.
First we must realize that all actions arc performed by individuals.
A collective operates always through the intermediary of one or
several individuals whose actions are related to the collective as the
secondary source. It is the meaning which the acting individuals and
all those who are touched by their action attribute to an action, that
determines its character. It is the meaning that marks one action as the
action of an individual and another action as the action of the state or
of the municipality. The hangman, not the state, cxccutcs a criminal.
It is the meaning of those concerned that discerns in the hangman's
action an action of the state. A group of armed men occupies a place.
It is the meaning of those concerned which imputes this occupation
not to the officers and soldiers on the spot, but t o their nation.-1f we
scrutinize the meaning of the various actions performed by individuals
we must necessarily learn everything about the actions of collective
wholes. For a social collective has no existence and reality outside of
the individual members' actions. The life of a collective is lived in the
actions of the individuals constituting% body. There is no social
collective conceivable which is not operative in the actions of some
individuals. The reality of a social integer consists in its directing and
releasing definite actions on the part of individuals. Thus the way to
a cognition of collective wholes is through an analysis of the individuals' actions.

Epistemological Problems of Hzcnzan Action

43

,4s a thinking and acting being man emerges from his prchuman
existence already as a social being. T h e evolution of reason, language,
and cooperation is the outcome of the same process; they were inseparably and necessarily linked together. But this process took place
in individuals. I t consisted in changes in the behavior of individuals.
There is no other substance in which it occurred than the individuals.
There is no substratum of society other than the actions of individuals.
That there are nations, states, and churches, that there is social
cooperation under the division of labor, becomes discernible only in
the actions of certain individuals. Nobody ever perceived a nation
without perceiving its members. In this sense one may say that a social collective comes into being through the actions of individuals.
That docs not mean that the individual is temporally antecedent. It
merely means that definite actions of individuals constitute the collective.
Thcre is no need to argue whether a collective is the sum resulting
from the addition of its elements or more, whether it is a being sui
generis, and whether it is reasonable or not to speak of its will, plans,
aims, and actions and to attribute to it a distinct "soul." Such pedantic
talk is idle. A collective whole is a particular aspect of the actions of
various individuals and as such a real thing determining the coursc of
events.
It is illusory to believe that it is possible to visualize collective
wholes. They are never visibIe; their cognition is always the outcome
of the understanding of the meaning which acting men attribute to
their acts. W e can see a crowd, i.e., a multitude of people. Whether
this crowd is a mere gathering or a mass (in the sensc in which this
term is used in contemporary psychology) or an organized body or
any other kind of social entity is a question which can only be answered by understanding the meaning which they themselves attach
to their presence. And this meaning is always the meaning of individoak. N o t our senses, but understanding, a mental process, makcs us
recognize social entities.
Those who want to start the study of human action from the collective units encounter an insurmountable obstacle in the fact that
an individual at the same time can belong and-with the exception
of the most primitive tribesmen-really belongs to various collective
entities. The problems raised b y the multiplicity of coexisting social
units and their mutual antagonisms can be solved only by methodological individua1ism.l4
14. See below, pp. 145-1 53, the critique of the collectivist theory of society.

Human Actio~z
I and We
T h e Ego is the unity of the acting being. It is unquestionably given and
cannot be dissolved or conjured away by any reasoning or quibbling.
The We is always the result of a summing up which puts together two
or more Egos. If somebody says I, no further questioning is necessary in
order to establish the meaning. The same is valid with regard to the Thou
and, provided the person in view is precisely indicated, with regard to the
He. Rut if a rnan says We, further information is needed to denote who the
Egos are who are comprised in this We. It is always single individuals who
say We; even if they say it in chorus, it yet remains an utterance of single
individuals.
T h e We cannot act otherwise than each of them acting on his own behalf. They can either all act together in accord; or one of them may act
for them all. In the latter case the cooperation of the others consists in
their bringing about the situation which makes one man's action effective
for them too. Only in this scnsc does the officer of a social entity act for
the whole; the individual members of the collective body either cause or
allow a single man's action to concern them too.
The endeavors of psychology to dissolve the Ego and to unmask it as an
illusion are idle. T h e praxeological Ego is beyond any doubts. N o matter
what a man was and what he may become later, in the very act of choosing
and acting he is an Ego.
From the pluralis logicus (and from the merely ceremonial pluralis
nlajestaticus) wc must distinguish the pluralis gloriosus. If a Canadian who
never tried skating says, "We are the world's foremost ice hockey players,"
or if an Italian boor proudly contends "We are the world's most eminent
painters," nobody is fooled. But with refercnce to politicaI and economic
problems the pluralis gloriosus evolves into the pluralis impcrialis and as
such plays a significant role in paving the way for the acceptance of
doctrines determining international economic policies.

j.

T h e Principle of Methodological
Singularism
-

S o less than from the action of an individual praxeologp begins its
investigations from the individual action. It does not deal in vague
terms with human action in general, but with concrctc action which
a definite man has performed at a definite date and a t a definite place.
But, of course, it docs not concern itself with the accidental and
environmental features of this action and with w h a t distinguishes it
from all other actions, b u t only with what is necessary and universal
in its performance.
T h e phiIosophy of universalism has from time immemorial blocked

Epistemological Problems of Human Action

45

access to a satisfactory grasp of praxeological problems, and contemporary universalists are utterly incapable of finding an approach to
them. Universalism, collectivism, and conceptual reaIism see only
wholes and universals. They speculate about mankind, nations, states,
classes, about virtue and vice, right and wrong, about entire classes
of wants and of commodities. They ask, for instance: W h y is "the"
value of "gold" higher than that of "iron"? Thus they never find
solutions, but antinomies and paradoxes only. T h e best-known instance is the value-paradox which frustrated even the work of the
classical economists.
Praxeology asks: What happens in acting? What docs it mean to
say that an individual then and there, today and here, at any time and
at any place, acts? What results if he chooses one thing and rejects
another?
'The act of choosing is always a decision among various opportunities open to the choosing individual. Man never chooses between
virtue and vice, but only between two modes of action which we call
from an adopted point of view virtuous or vicious. A man never
chooses between "gold" and "iron" in general, but always only between a definite quantity of gold and a definite quantity of iron.
Every single action is strictly limited in its immediate consequences.
If we want to reach correct conclusions, we must first of all look at
these limitations.
Human life is an unceasing sequence of single actions. But the single
action is by no means isolated. It is a link in a chain of actions which
together form an action on a higher level aiming at a more distant
end. Every action has two aspects. It is on the one hand a partial action
in the framework of a further-stretching action, the performance of
a fraction of the aims set by a more far-reaching action. I t is on the
other hand itself a whole with regard to the actions aimed at by the
performance of its own parts.
It depends upon the scope of the project on which acting man
is intent 2 t the instant whether the mare far-reaching actim er :,
partial action directed to a more immediate end only is thrown into
relief. There is no need for praxeology to raise questions of the type
of those raised by Gestaltpsychologie. The road to the performance
of great things must aIways lead through the performance of partial
tasks. A cathedral is something other than a heap of stones joined together. But the only procedure for constructing a cathedral is to lay
one stone upon another. For the architect the whole project is the
main thing. For the mason it is the single walI, and for the bricklayer
the single stones. ?Vhat counts for praxeology is the fact that the

46
Human Actiof2
only method to achieve greater tasks is to build from the foundations
step b y step, part by part.

6. The Individual and Changing Features of
Human Action
The content of human action, i.e., the ends aimed at and the means
chosen and applied for the attainment of these cnds, is determined
by the personal qualities of every acting man. Individual man is the
product of a long line of zoological evolution which has shaped his
physiological inheritance. H e is born the offspring and the heir of his
ancestors, and the precipitate and sediment of all that his forefathers
experienced are his biological patrimony. When he is born, he does
not enter the world in general as such, but a definite environment.
The innate and inherited biological qualities and a 1 that life has
worked upon him make a man what he is at any instant of his pilgrimage. They are his fate and destiny. His will is not "free" in the
metaphysical sense of this term. It is determined by his background
and all the influences to which he himself and his ancestors were exposed.
Inheritance and environment direct a man's actions. They suggest
to him both the cnds and the means. H e lives not simply as man in
abstracto; he lives as a son of his family, his race, his people, and his
age; as a citizen of his country; as a member of a definite social group;
as a practitioner of a certain vocation; as a follower of definite religious, metaphysical, philosophica1, and political ideas; as a partisan in
many feuds and controversies. He does not himself create his ideas
and standards of value; hc borrows them from other people. His
ideology is what his environment enjoins upon him. Only very few
men have the gift of thinking new and original ideas and of changing
the traditional body of creeds and doctrines.
Common man does not specdate about the great problems. With
regard to them he relies upon other people's authority, he bchavcs
as "every decent fellow must behave,'' he is like a sheep in the herd.
It is precisely this intellectual inertia that characterizes a man as a
common man. Yet the common man does choose. H e chooses to adopt
traditional patterns or patterns adopted by other people because he is
convinced that this procedure is best fitted to achieve his own welfare. And he is ready to change his ideology and consequently his
mode of action whenever he becomes convinced that this would
better serve his own interests.
Most of a man's daily behavior is simple routine. He performs

Epistemological Problems of Human Action

47
certain acts without paying special attention to them. H e does many
things because he was trained in his childhood to do them, because
other people behave in the same way, and because it is customary
in his environment. H e acquires habits, he develops automatic reactions. But he indulges in these habits only because he welcomes
their effects. As soon as he discovers that the pursuit of the habitual
way may hinder the attainment of ends considered as more desirable,
he changes his attitude. A man brought up in an area in which the
water is clean acquires the habit of heedlessly drinking, washing,
and bathing. When he moves to a place in which the water is polluted
by morbific germs, he will devote the most careful attention to procedures about which he never bothered before. He will watch himself
permanently in order not to hurt himself by indulging unthinkingly
in his traditionhl routine and his automatic reactions. The fact that
an action is in the regular course of affairs performed spontaneously,
as it were, does not mean that it is not due to a conscious volition aid
to a deliberate choice. Indulgence in a routine which possibly could
be changed is action.
Yraxeology is not concerned with the changing content of acting,
but with its pure form and its categorial structure. The study of the
accidental and environmental features of human action is the task of
history.

7. T h e Scope and the Specific Method of History
The study of all the data of experience concerning hunlan action
is the scope of history. The hjstorian collects and critically sifts all
available documents. On the ground of this evidence he approaches
his genuine task.
It has been asserted that the task of history is to show how events
actually happened, without imposing presupposirions and values
(wertfrei, i.e., neutral with regard to all value judgments). The
historian's report should be a faithful image of the past, an intellectuaI
photograph, as it were, giving a complete and unbiased description of
all facts. It should reproduce before our intellectual eye the past with
all its features.
hTow,a real reproduction of the past would require a duplication
not humanly possible. History is not an intellectual reproduction, but
a condensed representation of the past in conceptual terms. The
historian does not simply let the events speak for themselves. H e arranges them from the aspect of the ideas underlying the formation of
the general notions he uses in their presentation. H e does not report
facts as they happened, but only relevant facts. He does not approach

48
Human Action
the documents without presuppositions, but equipped with the whole
apparatus of his age's scientific knowledge, that is, with all the teachings of contemporary logic, mathematics, praxcology, and natural
sclence.
It is obvious that the historian must not be biased by any prejudices
and party tenets. Those writers who consider historical events as an
arsenal of weapons for the conduct of their party feuds are not
hisrorians but propagandists and apologists. They are not eager to
acquire knowledge but to justify the program of their parties. They
are fighting for the dogmas of a n~etaphysical,religious, national, political, or social doctrine. They usurp the name of history for their
writings as a blind in order to deceive the credulous. A historian
must first of all aim at cognition. He must free himself from any
partiality. H e must in this sensc be neutral with regard to any value
judgments.
This postulate of Wertfieiheit can easily be satisfied in the field
of the aprioristic science-logic, mathematics, and praxeology-and
in the field of the experimental natural sciences. It is logically not
difficult to draw a sharp line between a scientific, unbiased treatment of these disciplines and a treatmknt distorted by superstition,
preconceived ideas, and passion. It is much more difficult to comply
with the requirement of valuational neutrality in history. For the
subject matter of history, the concrete accidental and environmental
content of human action, is value judgments and their projection into
the reality of change. At every step of his activities the historian
is concerned with value judgments. The value judgments of the men
whose actions he reports are the substratum of his investigations.
It has been asserted that the historian himself cannot avoid judgments of value. No historian-not even the naive chronicler or newspaper reporter-registers all facts as they happen. He must discriminate, he must select some events which he deems worthy of being
registered and pass over in silence other events. This choice, it is said,
implies in itself a value judgment. It is necessarily conditioned by the
historian's world view and thus not impartiaI but an outcome of preconceived ideas. History can never be anything else than distortion
of facts; it can never be really scientific, that is neutral with regard
to values and intent only upon discovering truth.
There is, of course, no doubt that the discretion which the selection
of facts places in the hands of the historian can be abused. It can and
does happen that the historian's choice is guided by party bias. However, the problems involved are much more intricate than this popular doctrine would have us believe. Their solution must be sought on

Epistemological Problems of Human A c t i o n

49

the ground of a much more thorough scrutiny of the methods of
history.
In dealing with a historical problem the historian makes use of all
the knowledge provided by logic, mathematics, the natural sciences,
and especiaIly by praxeology. However, the mental tools of these
nonhistorical disciplines do not suffice for his task. They are indispensable auxiliaries for him, but in themselves they do Aot make it
possible to answer those questions he has to dcal with.
The course of history is determined by the actions of individuals
and by the effects of these actions. T h e actions are determined by the
value judgments of the acting individuals, i.e., the ends which they
were eager to attain, and b y the means which they applied for the
attainment of these ends. T h e choice of the means is an outcome of
the whole body of technological knowledge of the acting individuals.
I t is in many instances possible to appreciate the effects of the means
applied from the point of view of praxcologv or of the natural
sciences. But there remain a great many things for the elucidation of
which no such help is available.
The specific task of history for which it uses a specific method is
the study of these value judgments and of the effects of the actions
as far as they cannot be analyzed b y the teachings of a11 other branches
of knowledge. T h e historian's genuine problem is always to interpret
things as they happened. But he cannot solve this problem on the
ground of the theorems provided by all other sciences alone. There always remains at the bottom of each of his problems something which
resists analysis at the hand of these teachings of other sciences. It is
these individual and unique characteristics of each event which are
studied by the zcnderstanding.
The uniqueness or individuality which remains at the bottom of
cvcry historical fact, when a11 the means for its interpretation provided
bv logic, mathematics, praxeology, and the natural sciences have been
exhausted, is an ultimate datum. But whereas the natural sciences
cannot say anything about their uitimate data than that they are
wch, history can try to make its ultimate data intelligible. Although
it is impossible to reduce them to their causes-they would not be
rrltimatc data if such a reduction were possible-the historian can
understand them because he is himself a human being. In the philosophy of Rergson this understanding is called an intuition, viz., "la
sympathie par laquelle on se transporte a l'interieur d'un objet pour
coi'ncider avcc ce clu'il a d'unique et par cons6quent d'inexprimable." l5
German epistemology calls this act das spezifische Verstehen der
15. Hcnri Bergson, La Pens& et le nzouaant (4th ed. Paris, 1934)~
p. 205.

50
Human Action
Geisteswisscnschaftenor simply Verstehen.It is the net hod which all
historians and a11 other people always apply in commenting upon human events of the past and in forecasting future events. The discovery
and the delimitation of understanding was one of the most important
contributions of modern epistemology. It is, to bc sure, neither a project for a new science which does not yet exist and is to be founded
nor the recommendation of a new method of procedure for any of
the already existing sciences.
T h e understanding must not be confused with approval, be it only
conditional and circumstantial. The historian, the ethnologist, and
the psychologist sometimes register actions which are for their feelings simply repulsive and disgusting; they understand them only as
actions, i.e., in establishing the underlying aims and the technological
and praxeoIogica1 methods applied for their execution. T o understand an individual case does not mean to justify or to excuse it.
Neither must understanding be confused with the act of aesthetic
enjoyment of a phenomenon. Empathy (Einfiihlung) and understanding are two radically different attitudes. It is a different thing,
on the one hand, to understand a work of art historically, to determine its place, its meaning, and its importance in the flux of events,
and, on the other hand, to appreciate it emotionally as a work of art.
One can look at a cathedral with the eyes of a historian. But one can
look at the same cathedral either as an enthusiastic admirer or as an
unaffected and indifferent sightseer. The same individuals are capable
of both modes of reaction, of the aesthetic appreciation and of the
scientific grasp of understanding.
T h e understanding establishes the fact that an individual or a
group of individuals have engaged in a definite action cmanating
from definite value judgments and choices and aiming at definite
ends, and that they have applied for the attainment of these ends
definite means suggested by definite technological, therapeutical,
and praxeological doctrines. It furthermore tries to appreciate the
effects and the intensity of the effects brought about by an action; it
tries to assign to every action its relevance, i.e., its bearing upon the
course of events.
The scope of understanding is the mental grasp of phenomena
which cannot be totally elucidated by logic, mathematics, praxeology,
and thc natural sciences to the extent that they cannot be cleared up
by all these sciences. It must nevcr contradic; the teachings of these
other branches of kn~wledge.'~
The real corporeal existence of the
16. Cf. Ch. V. Langlois and Ch. Seignobos, Introduction to the Study of History, trans. by G. G. Berry (London, 19251, pp. 205-208.

Epistemological Problems of Human Action

51
devil is attested by innumerable historical doc~unentswhich are
rather reliable in all other regards. NIany tribunals in due process of
law have on the basis of the testimony of witnesses and the confessions of defendants established the fact that the devil had carnal
intercourse with witches. However, no appeal to understanding
could justify a historian's attempt to maintain that the devil really
existed and interfered with human events otherwise than in the
visions of an excited human brain.
While this is generally admitted with regard to the natural sciences,
there are some historians who adopt another attitude with regard to
economic theory. They try to oppose to the theorems of economics
an appeal to documents allegedly proving things incompatible with
these theorems. They do not realize that complex phenomena can
neither prove nor disprove any theorem and therefore cannot bear
witness against any statement of a theory. Economic history is possible only because there is an econon~ictheory capable of throwing
light upon economic actions. If there were no economic theory, reports concerning economic facts would be nothing Inore than a collection of unconnected data open to any arbitrary interpretation.
8. Conception and Understanding
The task of the sciences of human action is the comprehension of
the meaning and relevance of human action. They apply for this
purpose two different epistemological procedures: conception and
understanding. Conception is the mental tool of praxeology; understanding is the specific mental tool of history.
The cognition of praxeology is conceptual cognition. It refers to
what is necessary in human action. It is cognition of universals and
categories.
The cognition of history refers to what is unique and individual in
each event or class of events. It analyzes first each object of its studies
with the aid of the mental tooh provided by all other sciences. Having
achieved this preliminary work, it faces its own specific problem:
the elucidation of the unique and individual features of the case by
means of the understanding.
As was mentioned above, it has been assertcd that history can never
be scientific because historical understanding depcnds on the historian's subjective value judgments. Understanding, it is maintained, is
only a euphemistic term for arbitrariness. The writings of historians
are always one-sided and partial; they do not report the facts; they distort them.

52

Human Action

It is, of course, a fact that we have historical books written from
various points of view. There are historics of the Reformation written
from the Catholic point of view and others w-ritten from the Protestant
point of view. There are "proIetarian" histories and "bourgeois" histories, Tory historians and Whig historians; every nation, party, and
linguistic group has its own historians and its own ideas about history.
But the problem which these differences of interpretation offer
must not be confused with the intentional distortion of facts by propagandists and apologists parading as historians. Those facts which can
be established in an unquestionable way on the ground of the source
material available must be established as thp, preliminary work of the
historian. This is not a field for understanding. It is a task to be accomplished by the employment of the tools provided by all nonhistorical sciences. The phenomena are gathcred by cautious critical
observation of the records availabk. As far as the theories of rne
nonhistorical sciences on which the historian grounds his critical examination of the sources are reasonably reliable and certain, there
cannot be any arbitrary disagreement with regard to the establishment of the phenomena as such. What a historian asserts is either
correct or contrary to fact, is either proved or disproved by the
documents available, or vague becausc the sources do not provide us
with sufficient information. The experts may disagree, but only on
the ground of a reasonable interpretation of the evidence available.
The discussion does not allow any arbitrary statements.
However, the historians very often do not agree with regard to
the teachings of the nonhistorical sciences. Then, of course, disagreement with regard to the critical examination of the records and to
the conclusions to be drawn from them can ensue. An unbridgeable
conflict arises. But its cause is not an arbitrariness with regard to the
concrete historical phenomenon. It stems from an undecided issue
referring to the nonhistorical sciences.
An ancient Chinese historian could report that the emperor's sin
brought about a catastrophic drought and that rain fcll again when
the ruler had atoned for his sin. No modern historian would accept
such a report. The underlying meteorological doctrine is contrary to
uncontested fundamentals of contemporary natural science. But no
such unanimity exists in regard to many theological, biological, and
economic issues. Accordingly historians disagree.
A supporter of the racial doctrine of Xordic-Aryanism will disregard as fabulous and simply unbelievable any report concerning intellectual and moral achievements of "inferior" races. He will treat
such reports in the same way in which all modern historians deal

Epistemological Problems of Human Action

53

with the above-mentioned Chinese report. No agreement with regard to any phenomenon of the histov of Christianity can be attained
between people for whom the gospeis are Holy Writ and people in
whose eyes they are human documents. Catholic and Protestant historians disagree about many questions of fact because they start
from different theological ideas. A Mercantilist or Neo-Mercantilist
must necessarily be at variance with an economist. An account of
German monetary history in the years 1914to 1 9 2 3 is conditioned
by the author's monetary doctrines. The facts of the French Revolution are presented in a quite different manner by those who believe
in the sacred rights of the anointed king and those who hold other
views.
The historians disagree on such issues not in their capacity as
historians, but in their application of the nonhistorical sciences to
the subject matter of history. They disagree as agnostic doctors disagree in regard to the miracles of Lourdes with the members of the
medical committee for the collection of evidence concerning these
miracles. Only those who believe that facts write their own story
into the tabula rasa of the human mind blame the historians for such
differences of opinion. They faiI to realize that history can never be
studied without presuppositions, and that dissension with regard to
the presuppositions, i.e., the whole content of the nonhistorical
branches of Itnowledge, must determine the establishment of historical
facts.
These presuppositions also determine the historian's decision concerning the choice of facts to be ~nentionedand those to be omitted
as irrelevant. In searching for the causes of a cow's not giving milk
a modern veterinarian will disregard entirely all reports concerning
a witch's evil eye; his view would have been different three hundred
years ago. In the same way the historian selects from the indefinite
multitude of events that preceded the fact he is dealing with those
which could have contributed to its emergence-or have delayed it
-- 3 IIC
---I----L--- ---L:-L
2:-L:- ----- -C-L- ---L: ---..:
--I
-xiu
~ K L L : , L I I U ~ CWIIILII, a c i u l u i ~ l t ;LO 111s glasp U L LIK I I U I I I I I ~ L U ~ I C ~ I
sciences, could not have influenced it.
Changes in the teachings of the nonhistorical sciences consequently
must involve a rewriting of history. Every generation must treat
anew the same historical problems because they appear to it in a
different light. The theological world view of older times led to a
treatment of history other than the theorems of modern natural
science. Subjective economics produces historica1 works very different from those based on mercantilist doctrines. As far as divergences
in the books of historians stem from these disagreements, they are
A-

54

Human Action

not an outcome of aIleged vagueness and precariousness in historical
studies. They are, on the contrary, the result of the lack of unanimity
in the realm of those other sciekes which are popularly called certain and exact.
T o avoid any possible misunderstanding it is expedient to emphasize some further points. The divergences referred to above
must not be confused:
I. With p~~rposeful
ill-intentioned distortion of facts.
2 . With attempts to justify or to condemn any actions from a legal
or moral point of view.
3. With the merely incidental insertion of remarks expressing value
judgments in a strictly objective representation of the state of affairs.
A treatise on bacteriology does not lose its objectivity if the author,
accepting the human viewpoint, considers the preservation of human
life as an ultimate end and, applying this standard, labels effective
methods of fighting germs good and fruitless methods bad. A germ
writing such a book would reverse these judgments, but the material
content of its book would not differ from that of the human bacteriologist. In the same way a European historian dealing with the
Mongol invasions of the thirteenth century may speak of "favorable"
and "unfavorable" events because he takes the standpoint of the
European defenders of Western civilization. But this approval of one
party's standard of value need not necessarily interfere with the
material content of his study. It may-from the viewpoint of contemporary knowledge-be absolutely objective. A Mongolian historian could endorse it completely but for such casual remarks.
4. With a representation of one party's action in diplomatic or
inilitarv antagonisms. The clash of conflicting groups can be dealt
with from the point of view of the ideas, motives, and aims which impelled either side's acts. For a full comprehension of what happened
it is necessary to take account of what was done on both sides. The
outcome was the result of the interaction of both parties. But in
order to understand their actions the historian must try to see things
as they appeared to the acting men at the critical time, not only as
we see them now from the point of view of our present-day knowledge. A history of ~incoln'spoIicy in the weeks and months preceding the outbreak of the Civil War is of course incomplete. But no
historical study is complete. Regardless of whether the historian sympathizes with the Unionists or w-ith the Confederates or whether he is
absolutely neutral, he can deal in an objective way with Lincoln's
policy in the spring of 1861. Such an investigation is an indispensable

Epistewological Problems of Human Action

55

preliminary to answering the broader question of how the Civil W a r
broke out.
N o w finally, having settled these problems, it is possible to attack
the genuine question: Is there any subjective element in historical
understanding, and if so, in what manner does it determine the result of historical studies?
As far as the task of understanding is to establish the facts that
people were motivated by definite value judgments and aimed at
definite means, there cannot be any disagreement among true historians, is., people intent upon cognition of past events. There may
be uncertainty because of the insufficient information provided b y
the sources available. But this has nothing to do with understanding.
It refers to the preliminary work to be achieved by the historian.
But understanding has a second task to fulfill. It must appraise the
effects and the intensity of the effects brought about by an action;
it must deal with the relevance of each motive and each action.
Here we are faced with one of the main differences between physics
and chemistry on the one band and the sciences of human action on
the other. In the realm of physical and chemical events there exist
(or, at least, it is generally assumed that there exist) constant rclations between magnitudes, and man is capable of discovering these
constants with a reasonable degree of precision by means of laboratory
experiments. N o such constant relations exist in the field of human
action outside of physical and chemical technology and therapeutics.
For some time economists believed that they had discovered such a
constant relation in the effects of changes in the quantity of money
upon commodity prices. I t was asserted that a rise or fall in the
quantity of money in circulation must result in proportional changes
of commodity prices. Modern economics has clearly and irrefutably
exposed the fallaciousness of this statcment.17 Those economists
who want to substitute "quantitative economics" for what they call
"qualitative economics" are utterly mistaken. There are, in the field
of economics, no constant relations, and consequently no measurement is possible. If a statistician detcrrnines that a rise of 10 per cent
in the supply of potatoes in Atlantis at a definite time was followed
by a fall of 8 pcr cent in the price, he does not establish anything
about what happened or may happen with a change in the supply of
potatoes in another country or at another ti~ne.H e has not "measured"
the "elasticity of demand" of potatoes. H e has established a unique
and individual historical fact. N o intelligent man can doubt that the
17. See below, pp. 408-410.

56
Human Action
behavior of men with regard to potatoes and every other commodity
is variable. Different individuals value the same things in a different
way, and valuations change with the same individuals with changing
conditions.ls
Outside of the field of economic history nobody ever ventured to
maintain that constant relations prevail in human history. It is a fact
that in the armed conflicts fought in the past between Europeans
and backward peoples of other races, one European soldier was
usually a match for several native fighters. But nobody was ever
foolish enough to "measurc" the magnitude of European superiority.
T h e impracticability of measurement is not due to the lack of
technical methods for the establishment of measure. It is due to the
absence of constant relations. If it were only caused by technical
insufficiency, at least an approximate estimation would be possible
in some cases, But the main fact is that there are no constant relations.
Economics is not, as ignorant positivists repeat again and again, backward because it is not "quantitative." It is not quantitative and does
not measure because there are no constants. Statistical figures referring to economic events are historical data. They tell us what happened in a nonrepeatable historical case. Physical events can be interpreted on the ground of our knowledge concerning constant relations established by experiments. E-Iistorical cvents are not open to
such an interpretation.
The historian can enumerate all the factors which cooperated
in bringing about a known effect and all the factors which worked
against them and may have resulted in delaying and mitigating the
final outcome. But he cannot coordinate, except by understanding,
the various causative factors in a quantitative way to the effects produced. He cannot, except by understanding, assign to each of n factors
its role in producing the effect P. Understanding is in the realm of
history the equivalent, as it were, of quantitative analysis and measurement.
Technology can tell us how thick a steel plate must be in order not
to be pierced by a bullet fired at a distance of 300 yards from a
Winchester rifle. I t can thus answer the question why a man who
took shelter behind a steel plate of a known thickness was hurt or
not hurt by a shot fired. History is at a loss to explain with the same
assurance why there was a rise in the price of milk of 1 0per cent or
why President Roosevelt defeated Governor Dewey in the election
of 1944 or why France was from 1870 to 1940 under a republican
18. Cf, below,

p. 348.

Epistenzological Problem of Human Action

57

constitution. Such problems do not allow any treatment other than
that of understanding.
T o every historical factor understanding tries to assign its reIevance.
In the excrcise of understanding there is no room for arbitrariness
and capriciousness. The freedom of the historian is limited bv his
endeavor to provide a satisfactory explanation of reality. His guiding
star must be the search for truth. But there necessarily enters into
understanding an element of subjectivity. The understanding of
the historian is always tinged with the marks of his personality. It
reflects the mind of its author.
The a priori sciences-logic, mathematics, and praxeology-aim at
a knowledge unconditionally valid for all beings endowed with the
logical structure of the human mind. The natural sciences aim at a
cognition valid for a11 those beings which are not only endowed with
the faculty of human reason but with human senses. The uniformity
of human-logic and sensation bestows upon thesc branches of knowledge the character of universal validity. Such at least is the principle guiding the study of the physicists. Only in recent years have
they begun to see the limits of their endeavors and, abandoning the
excessive pretensions of older physicists, discovered the "uncertainty
principle." They realize today that there are unobservables whose
unobservability is a matter of cpistemological principle.lD
Historical understanding can never produce results which must be
accepted bv all men. Two historians who fully agree with regard
to the teachings of the nonhistorical sciences and with regard to the
cstabIishment of the facts as far they can be established without
recourse to the understanding of relevance, may disagree in their
understanding of the relevance of these facts. They may fully agree
in establishing that the factors a, b, and c worked together in producing the effect P; nonetheless they can widely disagree with regard to the relcvance of the respective contributions of a, b, and c
to the final outcome. As f3r as understanding aims at assigning its
relevance to each factor, it is open to the influence of subjective judgments. Of course, these are not judqments of value, they do not express preferences of the historian. They arc judgments of relevance.*O
19. Cf. A. Eddington, T h e Philosophy of Physical Science (New York, 1939),
pp. 28-48.
20. AS this i9 nor a dissertation on general epistemolopv, but the indispensable
fwlndarion 06 a treatise of ecot.lo.nics. there is no need to stress the analoqies
hetween rhe rmdersranding of historical relevance and the tasks to be accomplished by a diagnosinq physician. T h e epistemology of biology is outside of
the scope of our inquiries.

Human Action
Historians may disagree for various reasons. T h e y may hold different views with regard to the teachings of the nonhistorical sciences;
they may base their reasoning on a more or less complete familiarity
with the records; they may differ in the understanding of the motives
and aims of the acting men and of the means applied b y them. All
these differences are open to a settlement by "objective" reasoning;
it is possible to reach a universal agreement with regard t o them. But
as far as historians disagree with regard to judgments of relevance it
is i~npossibIeto find a solution which a11 sane men must accept.
T h e intellectual methods of science d o not differ in kind from
those applied b y the common man in his daily mundane reasoning.
T h e scientist uses the same tools which the layman uses; he merely
uses them more skiIIful1~~
and cautiously. Understanding is not a
privilege of the historians. It is everybody's business. In observing the
conditions of his environment everybody is a historian. Everybody
uscs understanding in dcaling with the uncertainty of future events
to which he must adjust his own actions. T h e distinctive reasoning
of the speculator is an understanding of the relevance of the various
factors determining future events. And-let us emphasize it even at
this early point of our investigations-action necessarily always aims
at futurc and therefore uncertain conditions and thus is always speculation. Acting man looks, as it were, with the eyes of a historian
into the future.

Natural History and Human History
Cosmogony, geology, and the history of biological changes are historical
disciplines as they deal with unique events of the past. However, they
operate exclusively with the epistemologica1 methods of the natural
sciences and have no need for understanding. They must sometimes take
recourse to only approximate estimates of magnitudes. But such estimates
are not judgments of relevance. They are a less perfect method of determining quantitative relations than is "exact" measurement. They must
not be confused with the state of affairs in the field of human action which
is characterized by the absence of constant relations.
If we speak of history, what we have in mind is only the history of
human action, whose specific mental tool is understanding.
The assertion that modern naturaI science owes all its achievements to
the experimental method is so~netimesassailed by referring to astronomy.
Now, modern astronomy is ~3sentiallyan application of the physical laws,
experimentally discovered on the earth, to the celestial bodies. In earlier
days astronomy was mainly based on the assumption that the movements
of the celestial bodies would not change their course. Copernicus and
Kepler simply tried to guess in what kind of curve the earth moves around

Epistemological Problems of Human Action

59

the sun. As the circle was considered the "most perfect" curve, Copernicus
chose it for his theory. Later, by similar guesswork, Iiepler substituted the
ellipse for the circle. Only since Newton's discoveries has astronomy become a natural science in the strict sense.

9. On Ideal T y p e s
History deals with unique and unrcpeatable events, with the irreversible flux of human affairs. A historical event cannot be described
without reference to the persons involved and to the place and date
of its occurrence. As far as a happening can be narrated without such
a reference, it is not a historical event but a fact of the natural sciences.
.l h e report that Professor X on February 20, 1945, performed a
certain experiment in his laboratory is an account of a historical
event. T h e physicist believes that he is right in abstracting from the
person of the experimenter and the date and place of the experiment.
H e relates only those circumstances which, in his opinion, are
relevant for the production of the result achieved and, w-hen repeated,
will produce the same result again. H e transforms the historical event
into a fact of the empirical natural sciences. H e disregards the active
interference of the experimenter and tries to imagine him as an indifferent observer and relater of unadulterated reality. It is not the
task of praxeology t o deal with the epistemological issues of this
philosophy. T h e physicists themselves are at last on the way to discovering the flaw in the godlikeness they used to arrogate to themselves.
Although unique and unrepeatable, historicaI events have one common feature: they are human action. History comprehends them as
human actions; it conceives their meaning b y the instrumentality of
praxeological cognition and understands their meaning in looking at
their individual and unique features. What counts for history is always the meaning of the men concerned: the meaning that they
attach to the state of affairs they want to alter, the meaning they
attach to their actions, and the meaning they attach to the effects
produced by the actions.
T h e aspect from which history arranges and assorts the infinite
lnultiplicity of events is their meaning. T h e only principle which it
applies for the systemization of its objects-men, ideas, institutions,
social entities, and artifacts-is meaning affinity. According to meaning affinity it arranges the ekmcnts into ideal types.
Ideal types are the specific notions employed in historical research
and in the representation of its results. They are concepts of under-

50

Humam Action

standing. As such they are entirely different from praxeological categorles and concepts and from the concepts of the natural sciences.
An ideal type is not a class concept, because its description does not
indicate the marks whose presence definitely and unambiguously
determines class membership. An ideal type cannot be defined; it
must be characterized by an enumeration of those features whose
presence by and large decides whether in a concrete instance we are
or are not faced with a specimen belonging to the ideal type in question. I t is peculiar to the ideal type that not all its characteristics need
to be present in any one example. Whether or not the absence of
some characteristics prevents the inclusion of a concrete specimen
in thc ideal type in question, depends on a relevance judgment by
understanding. The ideal type itself is an outcome of an understanding of the motives, ideas, and aims of the acting individuals and of
the means they apply.
An ideal type has nothing at all to do with statistical means and
averages. Most of the characteristics concerned are not open to a
numerical determination, and for this reason alone they could not
enter into a calculation of averages. But the main reason is to be seen
in something else. Statistical averages denote the behavior of the
members of a class or a type, already constituted by means of a definition or characterization referring to other marks, with regard
to features not referred to in the definition or characterization. The
membership of the class or type must bc known before the statistician
can start investigating special features and use the result of this investigation for the establishment of an average. W e can establish
the average age of the United States Senators or we can reckon
averages concerning the behavior of an age class of the pppulation
with regard to a special problem. But it is logically impossible to
make the ~nembershipof a class or type depend upon an average.
S o historical problem can be treated without the aid of ideal types.
Even when the historian deals with an individual person or with a
single event, he cannot avoid referring to idea1 types. If he speaks of
Napoleon, he must refer to such ideal types as commander, dictator,
revolutionary leader; and if he deals with the French Revolution he
must refer to ideal types such as revolution, disintegration of an
established regime, anarchy. It may be that the reference to an ideal
type consists merely in rejecting its applicability to the case in question. But all historical events are described and interpreted by means
of ideal types. T h e layman too, in dealing with events of the past or
of the future, must always make use of ideal types and unwittingly
always does so.

Epistemological Problem of Human Action

6I

Whether or not the employment of a definite ideal type is expedient
and conducive to an adequate grasp of phenomena can only be decided by understanding. It is not the ideal type which determines
the moie of understanding; it is the mode of understanding that requires the construction and use of corresponding ideal types.
The ideal types are constructed with the use of ideas and concepts
dcveloped by all nonhistorical branches of knowledge. Every cognition of history is, of course, conditioned by the findings of the other
sciences, depends upon them, and must never contradict them. But
historical knowledge has another subject matter and another method
than these other sciences, and they in turn have no use for understanding. Thus the ideal types must not be confused with concepts
of the nonhistorical sciences. This is valid also with regard to the
praxeological categories and concepts. They provide, to be sure, the
indispensable mental tools for the study of history. However, they
do not refer to the understanding of the unique and individual events
which are the subject matter of history. An ideal type can therefore
never be a simple adoption of a praxeological concept.
I t happens in many instances that a term used by praxeology to
signify a praxeological concept serves to signify an ideal type for the
historian. Then the historian uses one word for the expression of two
diffcrent things. H e applies the term sometimes to signify its praxeological connotation, but more often to signify an ideal type. In
the latter case the historian attaches to the word a meaning different
from its praxeological meaning; he transforms it by transferring it to
a different field of inquiry. T h e two terms connote different things;
they are homonyms. The economic concept "entrepreneur" belongs
to a stratum other than the ideal tvpe "entrepreneur" as used by
economic history and descriptive economics. (On a third stratum
lies the legal term "entrepreneur.") The economic term "entrepreneur" is a precisely defined concept which in the framework of
a theory of market economy signifies a clearly integrated funcnnrnno~.~
AAPP
"
nnt ;nol.rrln +ha
tiG;;.21The histGrica! idea! pn-w= " o n ~ ~ylrllrCII
Y Ysame members. hTobody in using it thinks of shoeshine boys, cab
drivers who own their cars, small businessmen, and small farmers.
\%'hat
economics establishes with regard to entrepreneurs is rigidly
valid for a11 members of the class without any regard to temporal and
geographica1 conditions and to the various branches of business. What
economic history establishes for its ideal types can differ according
to the particular circumstances of various ages, countries, branches
of business, and many other conditions. History has little use for a
z I . See below,pp. 252-256.
U"b.3

ll"C

111L1UUG C I I b

62

Human Action

general ideal type of entrepreneur. I t is more concerned with such
types as: the American entrepreneur of the time of Jefferson, German heavy industries in the age of William 11, New England textile
manufacturing in the last decades preceding the first World War,
the Protestant haute finance of Paris, self-made entrepreneurs, and
SO on.
Whether the use of a definite ideal type is to be recommended or
not depends entirely on the mode of understanding. I t is quite comrnon nowadays to employ two ideal types: Left-Wing Parties
(Progressives) and Right-Wing Parties (Fascists). T h e former includes the Western democracies, some Latin American dictatorships,
and Russian Bolshevism; the latter Italian Fascism and German Nazism.
This typification is the outcome of a definite mode of understanding. Another mode would contrast Democracy and Dictatorship.
Then Russian 13olshevism, Italian Fascism, and German ATazism belong to the ideal type of dictatorial government, and the Western
systems to the ideal type of democratic government.
I t was a fundamental mistake of the Historical School of Wirtschaftliche Stnats.ruissenschaftElzin Germany and of Institutionalism
in America to interpret economics as the characterization of the behavior of an ideal type, the homo oeconomicus. According to this
doctrine traditional or orthodox economics does not deal with the
behavior of man as he really is and acts, but with a fictitious or hypothetical image. I t pictures a being driven exclusively b y "economic"
motives, is., solely by the intention of making the greatest possible
material or monetary profit. Such a being docs not have and never
did have a counterpart in reality; it is a phantom of a spurious armchair philosophy. hTo man is exclusively motivated by the desire to
become as rich as possible; many are not at all influenced by this
*lean craving. I t is vain to refer to such an illusory homunculus in
dealing with life and history.
Even if this really were the meaning of classical economics, the
homo oeconomicus would certainly not be an ideal type. T h e ideal
type is not an embodiment of one side or aspect of man's various aims
2nd desires. I t is always the representation of complex phenomena
of reality, either of tnen, of institutions, or of ideologies.
T h e d~assicaleconomists sought to explain the formation of prices.
Thev were fully aware of the fact that prices are not a product of the
actiGities of a special group of people, but the result of an interplay
of all members of the market society. This was the meaning of their
statement that demand and supply determine the formation of prices.
However, the classical economists failed in their endeavors to pro-

Epistemological Problem of Human Action

63

vide a satisfactory theory of value. They were at a loss to find a
soIution for the apparent paradox of value. They were puzzled by
thc alleged paradox that "gold" is more highly valued than "iron,"
although the latter is more "useful" than the former. Thus they could
not construct a general theory of value and could not trace back the
~henomenaof market exchange and of production to their ultimate
sources, the behavior of the consumers. This shortcoming forced
them to abandon their ambitious plan to develop a general theory of
human action. They had to satisfy themselves with a theory explaining only the activities of the businessman without going back to the
choices of everybody as the ultimate determinants. They dealt only
with the actions of businessmen eager to buy in the cheapest market
and to sell in the dearest. The consamer was left outside the field of
their theorizing. Later the epigones of classical economics explained
and justified this insufficiency as an intentional and methodologically
necessary procedure. It was, they asserted, the deliberate design
of the economists to restrict their investigations to only one aspect
of human endeavor-namely, to the "economic" aspect. I t was their
intention to use the fictitious image of a man driven solely by "economic" motives and to neglect all others although they were fully
aware of the fact that real men are driven by many other, "noneconomic" motives. T o deal with these other motives, one group of
these interpreters maintained, is not the task of economics but of other
branches of knowledge. Another group admitted that the treatment
of these "noneconomic" motives and their influence on the formation
of prices was a task of economics also, but they believed that it must
be left to later generations. It will be shown at a later stage of our investigations that this distinction between "economic" and "noneconomic" motives of human action is untcnabIe." At this point it is
only important to realize that this doctrine of the "economic" side
of human action utterly misrepresents the teachings of the'classical
economists. They never intended to do what this doctrine ascribes
co hem. Tney wanted to conceive the reai formarion of prices-not
fictitious prices as they would be determined if men were acting under
the sway of hypothetical conditions different from those really influencing them. The prices they try to explain and do explain-although without tracing them back to the choices of the consumers
-are real market prices. The demand and supply of which they
speak are real factors determined by all motives instigating men to
buy or to sell. What was wrong with their theory was that they did
not trace demand back to the choices of the consumers; they licked

Human Action

64

a satisfactory theory of demand. But it was not their idea that demand as they used this concept in their dissertations was exclusively
determined by "economic" motives as distinguished from "noneconomic" motives. As they restricted their theorizing to the actions of
businessmen, they did not deal with the motives of the ultimate consumers. Nonetheless their theory of prices was intended as an explanation of real prices irrespective of the motives and ideas instigating
the consumers.
Modern subjective economics starts with the solution of the apparent paradox of value. It neither limits its theorems to the actions
of businessmen alone nor deals with a fictitious homo oeconomicus.
It treats the inexorable categories of everybody's action. Its theorems
concerning commodity prices, wage rates, and interest rates refer to
all these phenomena without any regard to the motives causing
people to buy or to sell or to abstain from buying or selling. It is
time to discard entirely any reference to the abortive attempt to
justify the shortcomings of older economists through the appeal to
the homo oeconomicus phantom.
10.

T h e Procedure of Economics

The scope of praxeology is the explication of the category of human action. All that is needed for the deduction of all praxeological
theorems is knowledge of the essence of human action. I t is a knowledge that is our own because we are men; no being of human descent
that pathological conditions have not reduced to a merely vegetative
existence lacks it. N o special experience is needed in order to comprehend these theorems, and no experience. however rich, could disclose
them to a being who did not know a priori what human action is. The
only way to a cognition of these theorems is logical analysis of our
inhereni knowledge of the category of action. W e must bethink
ourselves and reflect upon the structure of human action. Like logic
and mathematics, praxeoiogicai itnowicdgc is in us; it does not come
from without.
All the concepts and theorems of praxeology are implied in the
category of human action. The first task is to extract and to deduce
them, t; expound their implications and to define the universal conditions of acting as such. Having shown what conditions are required
by any action, one must go further and define-of course, in a
categorial and formal sense-the less general conditions required for
special modes of acting. It would be possible to deal with this second

Epistenzological Problems of Human Action

65

task by delineating all thinkable conditions and deducing from them
all inferences logically permissible. Such an ail-comprehensive system
would provide a theory referring not only to human action as it is
under the conditions and circumstances given in the real world in
which man lives and acts. It wouId deal no less with hypothetical
acting such as would take place under the unrealizable conditions of
imaginary worlds.
But the end of science is to know reality. It is not mental gymnastics
or a logical pastime. Therefore praxeology restricts its inquiries to the
study of acting under those conditions and presuppositions which
are given in reality. It studies acting under unrealized and unrcalizable conditions only from two points of view. It deals with states of
affairs which, although not real in the present and past world, could
possibly become real at some future date. And it examines unreal
and unrealizable conditions if such an inquiry is needed for a satisfactory grasp of what is going on under the conditions present in reality.
However, this reference to experience does not impair the aprioristic
character of praxeology and economics. Experience merely directs
our curiosity toward certain problems and diverts it from other
problems. It tells us what we should explore, but it does not tell us how
we could proceed in our search for knowledge. Moreover, it is not
experience but thinking alone which teaches us that, and in what
instances, it is necessary to investigate unrealizable hypothetical conditions in order to conceive what is going on in the real world.
The disutility of labor is not of a categorial and aprioristic character. W e can without contradiction think of a world in which labor
does not cause uneasiness, and we can depict the state of affairs prevailing in such a world.23But the real world is conditioned by the
disutility of labor. Only theorems based on the assumption that
labor is a source of uneasiness are applicable for the comprehension
of what is going on in this world.
Experience teaches that there is disutility of labor. But it does not
teach it dlrectiy. There is no phenomenon that introduces itseif as
disutility of labor. There are only data of experience which are interpreted, on the ground of aprioristic knowledge, to mean that men
consider leisure-i.e., the absence of labor-other things bcing equal,
as a more desirable condition than the expenditure of labor. W e see
that men renounce advantages which they could get by working
more-that is, that they arc ready to make sacrifices for the attainment of leisure. W e infer from this fact that leisure is valued as a good
23.

See below, pp. 131-133.

66

Human Action

and that labor is regarded as a burden. But for previous praxeological
insight, we would never be in a position to reach this conclusion.
A theory of indirect exchange and all further theories built upon
it-as the theory of circulation credit-are applicable only to the
interpretation of events within a world in which indirect exchange
is practiced. In a world of barter trade only it would be mere intellectual play. It is unlikely that the economists of such a world, if
economic science could have emerged at all in it, would have given
any thought to the problems of indirect exchange, money, and all
the rest. In our actual world, however, it is an essential part of economic theory.
T h e fact that praxcology, in fixing its eye on the comprehension
of reality, concentrates upon the investigation of those problems
which are useful for this purpose, does not alter the aprioristic character of its reasoning. But it marks the way in which economics, up
to now the only elaborated part of praxeology, presents the results
of its endeavors.
Economics does not follow the procedure of logic and mathematics.
It does not present an integrated system of pure aprioristic ratiocination severed from any reference to reality. In introducing assumptions into its reasoning, it satisfies itself that the treatment of the
assumptions concerned can render useful services for the comprehension of reality. It does not strictly separate in its treatises and monographs pure science from the application of its theorems to the solution of concrete historical and political problems. It adopts for the
organized presentation of its results a form in which aprioristic theory
and the interpretation of l~istoricalphenomena are intertwined.
It is obvious that this mode of procedure is enjoined upon economics by the very nature and essence of its subject matter. I t has
given proof of its expediency. However, one must not overlook the
fact that the manipulation of this singular and logically somewhat
strange procedure requires caution and subtlety, and that uncritical
and superficial minds have again and again been led astray by careless confusion of the two epistemologically different methods implied.
There are no such things as a historical method of economics or
a discipline of institutional economics. There is economics and there
is economic history. The two must never bc confused. All theorems
of economics are necessarily valid in every instance in which all the
assumptions presupposed are given. Of course, they have no practical
significance in situations where these conditions are not established.
The theorems referring to indirect exchange are not applicable to

Epistemological Problems of Human Action
conditions where there is no indirect exchange. But this does not impair their validity.24
The issue has been obfuscated by the endeavors of governments
and powerful pressure groups to disparage economics and to defame
the economists. Princes and democratic majorities are drunk with
power. They must reluctantly admit that they are subject to the
laws of nature. But they reject the very notion of economic law. Are
they not the supreme legislators? Don't they have the power to crush
every opponent? hTo war lord is prone to acknowledge any limits
other than those imposed on him by a superior armed force: Servile
scribblers are always ready to foster such complacency by expounding the appropriate doctrines. They call their garbled presumptions
"historical economics." In fact, economic history is a long record of
government policies that failed because they were designcd with a
bold disregard for the laws of economics.
It is impossible to understand the history of economic thought if
one does not pay attention to the fact that economics as such is a
challenge to the conceit of those in power. An economist can never
be a favorite of autocrats and demagogues. With them he is always
the mischief-maker, and the more they are inwardly convinced that
his objections are well founded, the more they hate him.
In the face of all this frenzied agitation it is expedient to establish
the fact that the starting point of all praxeological and economic
reasoning, the category of human action, is proof against any criticisms
and objections. N o appeal to any historical or empirical considerations
whatever can discover any fault in the proposition that men purposefully aim at certain chosen ends. No talk about irrationaIity, the
unfathomable depths of the human soul, the spontaneity of the
phenomena of life, automatisms, reflexes, and tropisms, can invalidate the statement that man makes use of his reason for the realization of wishes and desires. From the unshakable foundation of the
category of human action praxeology and economics proceed step
by step by means of discursive reasoning. Precisely defining assumptions and conditions, they construct a system of concepts and draw
all the inferences implied by logically unassailabIe ratiocination. With
regard to the results thus obtained only two attitudes are possible:
either one can unmask logical errors in the chain of the deductions
which produced these results, or one must acknowledge their correctness and validity.
I t is vain to object that life and reality arc not logical. Life and
24. Cf. F. H . Knight, The Ethics of Competition and Other Essays (New
Yo& 1 9 3 5 ) - P- '39.

Human Action

68

reality are neither logical nor illogical; they are simply given. But
logic is the only tool available to man for the comprehension of both.
It is vain to objcct that life and history are inscrutable and ineffable
and that human reason can never penetrate to their inner core. T h e
critics contradict thcmselves in uttering words about the ineffable and
expounding theories-of course, spurious theories-about the nnfathomable. There are many things beyond the reach of the human mind.
Rut as far as man is able to attain any knowledge, howevcr limited, he
can use only one avenue of approach, that opened b y reason.
N o less illusory are the endeavors to play off understanding against
thc theorems of economics. The domain of historical understanding
is exclusivcly the elucidation of those problems which cannot be
entircly elucidated by the nonhistorical sciences. Understanding must
ncver contradict the theories developed by the nonhistorical sciences.
Understanding can never do anything but, on the one hand, establish
the fact that pcople were motitrated by certain ideas, aimed at certain ends, and applied certain means for the attainment of these ends,
and, on the other hand, assign to the various historical factors their
relevance so far as this cannot be achieved by the nonhistorical scicnccs. Understanding does not entitle the modern historian to assert
that exorcism ever was an appropriate means to cure sick cows.
Neither does it permit him to maintain that an cconomic law was
not valid in ancient Rome or in the crnpire of the Incas.
Man is not infallible. H e searches for truth-that is, for the most
adequate comprchcnsion of realitv as far as the structure of his mind
and reason makes it accessible to him. Man can never become omniscient. H e can never be absolutcly certain that his inquiries were not
rnislcd and that what he considers as certain truth is not error. All
that man can do is submit all his theories again and again to the most
critical reexamination. This means for the economist to trace back
all theorems to their unquestionable and certain ultimate basis, the
category of human action, and to test b y the most careful scrutiny
-11

"p.-.7-.-.,.:n.."

-...a :.An,.m-,-ae

la,J:",T

$,.n-

~JJUIII~LIVIIJ
ailu I I I I ~ I ~ I I L LLJ L ~ U J I ~ I~L V L J I

tL:@ ha@:@

C J ~ W LILIO~O

t n *ha thnnvocv

ulr

L I I ~ W X ~ Z ~ L

under examination. It cannot be contended that this procedure is
a guarantee against error. But it is undoubtedly the most effective
method of avoiding error.
Praxeologp-and conseqnentlv economics too-is a deductive svstern. T t draws its strength from the starting point of its deductions.
from the category of action. N o economic theorem can be considered
sound that is not solidly fastened upon this foundation by an irrcfutat ~ l echain of rcasoning. A statement proclaimed without such a connection is arbitrary and floats in midair. It is impossible to deal with

Epistemological Problems of Human Action

69

a special segment of economics if one does not encase it in a complete

system of action.
The empirical sciences start from singular events and proceed from
the unique and individual to the more universal. Their treatment is
subject to specialization. They can deal with segments without paying attention to the whole field. The economist must never be a
specialist. Zn dealing with any probiem he must always fix his glance
upon the whole system.
Historians often sin in this respect. They are ready to invent
theorems ad hoc. They sometimes fail to recognize that it is impossible
to abstract any causal relations from the study of complex phenomena.
Their pretension to investigate reality without any reference to what
they disparage as preconceived ideas is vain. In fact they unwittingly
apply popular doctrines long since unmasked as fallacious and contra.
dictory.

r I. The Limitations on Praxeological Concepts
The praxeological categories and concepts are devised for the comprehension of human action. They become self-contradictory and
nonsensical if one tries to apply them in dealing with conditions different from those of human life. The naive anthropomorphism of
primitive religions is unpalatable to the philosophic mind. However,
the endeavors of philosophers to define neatly the attributes of an
absolute being, free from all the limitations and frailties of human
existence, by the use of praxeological concepts, are no less questionable.
Scholastic philosophers and theologians and likewise Theists and
Deists of the Age of Reason conceived an absolute and perfect being,
unchangeable, omnipotent, and omniscient, and yet planning and
acting, aiming at ends and employing means for the attainment of
these ends. But action can only be imputed to a discontented being,
and repeated action only to a being who lacks the power to remove
his uneasiness once and for all at one stroke. An acting being is discontented and therefore not almighty. If he were contented, he would
not act, and if he were almighty, he would have long since radically
removed his discontent. For an all-powerful being there is no pressure
to choose between various states of uneasiness; he is not under the
necessity of acquiescing in the lesser evil. Omnipotence would mean
the power to achieve everything and to enjoy full satisfaction without being restrained by any limitations. But this is incompatible with
the very concept of action. For an almighty being the categories of

ends and means do not exist. H e is above all human comprehension,
concepts, and understanding. For the almighty being every "means"
renders unlimited services, he can apply every "means" for the attainment of any ends, he can achieve every end without the employment of any means. It is beyond the faculties of the human mind
to think the concept of almightiness consistently to its ultimate logical
consequences. The paradoxes are insoluble. Has the almighty being
the power to achieve something which is immune to his later interference? If he has this power, then there are limits to his might and
he is no longer almighty; if he lacks this power, he is by virtue of this
fact alone not almighty.
Are omnipotence and omniscience compatible? Omniscience presupposes that all future happenings are already unalterably determined. If there is omniscience, omnipotence is inconceivable. Impotence to change anything in the predetermined course of events would
restrict the power of any agent.
Action is a display of potency and control that are limited. It is
a manifestation of man who is restrained by the circumscribed powers
of his mind, the physiological nature of his body, the vicissitudes of
his environment, and the scarcity of the external factors on which his
welfare depends. It is vain to refer to the imperfections and weaknesses of human life if one aims at depicting something absolutely
perfect. The very idea of absolute perfection is in every way selfcontradictory. The state of absolute perfection must be conceived
as complete, final, and not exposed to any change. Change could
only impair its perfection and transform it into a less perfect state; the
mere possibility that a change can occur is incompatible with the
concept of absolute perfection. But the absence of change-ix., perfect immutability, rigidity and immobility-is tantamount to the absence of life. Life and perfection are incompatible, but so are death
and perfection.
The living is not perfect because it is liable to change; the dead is
not perfect because it does not live.
T h e language of living and acting men can form comparatives and
superlatives in comparing degrees. But absoluteness is not a degree;
it is a limiting notion. The absolute is indeterminable, unthinkable and
ineffable. It is a chimerical conception. There are no such things as
perfect happiness, perfect men, eternal bliss. Every attempt to describe
the conditions of a land of Cockaigne, or the life of the Angels, results in paradoxes. Where there are conditions, therc are limitations
and not perfection; there are endeavors to conquer obstacles, there
are frustration and discontent.

Epistemological Problems of Human Action

71

After the philosophers had abandoned the search for the absolute,
the utopians took it up. They weave dreams about the perfect state.
They do not realize that the state, the social apparatus of compulsion
and coercion, is an institution to cope with human imperfection and
that its essential function is to inflict punishment upon minorities in
order to protect majorities against the detrimental consequences of
certain actions. With "perfect" men there would not he any need for
compulsion and coercion. But utopians do not pay heed to human
nature and the inalterable conditions of human life. Godwin thought
that man might become immortal after the abolition of private
property." Charles Fourier babbled about the ocean containing
lemonade instead of salt water.20 Marx's economic system blithely
ignored the fact of the scarcity of material factors of production.
Trotsky revealed that in the proletarian paradise "the average human
type will rise to the heights of an Aristotle, a Goethe, or a Marx. And
above this ridge new peaks will rise." 27
Nowadays the most popular chimeras are stabilization and security.
We will test these catchwords later.
25. William Godwin, A n Enquiry Concerning Political Justice and Its InfTuence on General Virtue and Happiness (Dublin, 1793). 11, 393-403.
26. Charles Fourier, 7'he'orie des quatre mouvernents (Oeuvres compl&tes, 3d
ed. Paris, I 846), I, 43.
27. Leon Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, trans. by R. Strunsky (London,

w z s ) , p. 256.

111. ECONOMICS AxD T H E REVOLT AGAINST REASON
I.

T h e Revolt Against Reason

is true that some philosophers were ready to overrate the power
of human reason. They believed that man can discover by ratioIcination
the final causes of cosmic events, the inherent ends the prirne
T

mover aims at in creating the universe and determining the course of
its evolution. 'They expatiated on the "Absolute" as if it were their
pocket watch. They did not shrink from announcing eternal absolute values and from establishing moral codes unconditionally binding
on all men.
Then there was the long line of utopian authors. They drafted
schemes for an earthly paradise in which pure reason alone should
rule. They failed to realize that what they called absolute reason
and manifest truth was the fancy of their own minds. They blithely
arrogated to themselves infalIibility and often advocated intolerance,
the violent oppression of all dissenters and heretics. 'They aimed at
dictatorship either for themselves or for men who would accurately
put their plans into execution. There was, in their opinion, no other
salvation for suffering mankind.
There was Hegel. H e was a profound thinker and his writings are a
treasury of stimulating ideas. But he was laboring under the delusion
that Geist, the Absolute, revealed itself through his words. There was
nothing in the universe that was hidden to Hegel. It was a pity- that
his language was so ambiguous that it could be interpreted in various
ways. The right-wing Hegelians interpreted it as an endorsement
of the l'russian system of autocratic government and of the dogmas of the Prussian Church. The left-wing Hegelians read out of it
atheism, intransigent revolutionary radicalism, and anarchistic doctrines.
There was Auguste Comte. H e knew precisely what the future had
in store for mankind. And, of course, he considered himself as the
supreme legislator. For example, he regarded astronomical studies as
useless and wanted to prohibit them. He planned to substitute a new
religion for Christianity, and selected a lady who in this new church
was destined to replace the Virgin. Comte can be exculpated, as he

Economics and the Revolt Against Reason

73

was insane in the full sense which pathology attaches to this term. But
what about his followers?
Many more facts of this kind could be mentioned. But they are
no argument against reason, rationalism, and rationaIity. These dreams
have nothing at all to do with the question of whether or not reason
is the right and only instrument available for man in his endeavors to
attain as much knowledge as is accessible to him. T h e honest and
conscicntious truth-seekcrs have never pretended that reason and
scientific research can answer all questions. Thev were fully aware
of the limitations imposed upon the human miid. They cannot be
taxed with responsibility for the crudities of the philosophy of
Haeckel and the simplism of the various materialist schools.
The rationalist philosophers themselves were always intent upon
showing the boundaries both of aprioristic theory and of empirical
rcscarc11.l The first representative of British political economy, David
Hume, the Utilitarians, and the American Pragmatists are certainly
not guilty of having exaggerated the power of man to attain truth. I t
would be more justifiable to blame the philosophy of the last two
hundred years for too much agnosticism and skeptickm than for overconfidence in what could be achicved by the human mind.
The revolt against reason, the characteristic mental attitude of our
age, was not caused by a lack of modesty, caution, and sclf-examination on the part of the philosophers. Neither was it due to failures in
the evolution of modern naturaI science. The amazing achievements
of technology and therapeutics speak a language which nobody can
ignore. It is hopeless to attack modern science, whether from the
angle of intuitionism and mysticism, or from any other point of view.
T h e revolt against reason ;as directed against another target. It did
not aim at the natural sciences, but at economics. T h e attack against
the natural sciences was only the logically necessary outcome of the
attack against economics. It was impermissible to dethrone reason in
one field only and not to question it in other branches of knowledge
also.
The great upheaval was born out of the historical situation existing
in the middle of the nineteenth century. The economists had entirely
demolished the fantastic delusions of the socialist utopians. T h e deficiencies of the classical system prevented them from comprehending
w h y every socialist plan must be unrealizable; but they knew enough
t o demonstrate the futility of all socialist schemes produced up to their
time. T h e communist ideas were done for. T h e socialists were absoI.

Cf., for instance, Louis Rougier, Les Paralogismes du rationalisme (Paris,

1920).

74
Hurwzlrn Action
lutely unable to raise any objection to the devastating criticism of
their schcmes and to advance any argument in their favor. It seemed
as if socialism was dead forever.
Only onc way could lead the socialists out of this impasse. They
could attack logic and reason and substitute mystical intuition for
ratiocination. It was the historical role of Karl Marx to propose this
solution. Based on Hegcl's dialectic mysticism he blithely arrogated
to hirnsclf thc ability to predict the futurc. Hegel pretended to know
that Geist, in creating the universe, wanted to bring about the Prussian monarchy of Frederick William 111. But Marx was better informed about Geist's plans. He knew that the final cause of historical
evolution was the establishment of the socialist millennium. Socialism
is bound to comc "with thc inexorability of a law of nature." And as,
according to Hegel, every later stage of history is a higher and better
stage, there cannot be any doubt that socialism, the final and ultimate
stage of mankind's evolution, will be perfect from any point of view.
It is consequently useless to discuss the details of the operation of a
socialist commonwealth. History, in due time, will arrange everything
for the best. It does not need the advice of mortal men.
There was still the main obstacle to overcome: the devastating
criticism of the economists. Marx had a solution at hand. Human reason, he assertcd, is constitutionally unfitted to find truth. The logical
structure of mind is different with various social classes. There is no
such thing as a universally valid logic. What mind produces can
never be anything but "ideology," that is in the Marxian terminology,
a set of ideas disguising the selfish interests of the thinlter's own social
class. Hence, the "bourgeois" mind of the economists is utterly incapable of producing more than an apology for capitalism. The teachings of "bourgeois" science, an offshoot of "bourgeois" logic, are of
no avail for the proletarians, the rising class destined to abolish all
classes and to convert the earth into a Garden of Eden.
Bur, of course, thc logic of the proletarians is not merely a class
logic. '*Theidcas of pro!e;ariaii logic are iiot p r i j i ideas, but eman.aD
tions of logic pure and simple." Moreover, by virtue of a special
privilegc, the logic of certain elect bourgeois is not tainted with the
original sin of being bourgeois. Karl Marx, the son of a well-to-do
lawyer, married to the daughter of a Prussian Junker, and his collaborator Frederick Engels, a wealthy textile manufacturer, never doubted
that they themselves were above the law and, notwithstanding their
2. Cf. Eugen Dietzgen, Briefe iiber Logik, speziell demokratisch-proletarische
Logik (zd ed. Stuttgart, rgoj), p. I I 2.

Economics and the Revolt Against Reason

75

bourgeois background, were endowed with the power to discover
absolute truth.
It is the task of history to describe the historical conditions which
made such a crude doctrine popular. Economics has another task.
I t must analyze both Marxian polylogism and the other brands of
polylogism formed after its pattern, and expose their fallacies and
contradictions.
2.

T h e Logical Aspect: of Polylogism

Marxian polylogism asserts that the logical structure of mind is
differentwith {he members of various social classes. Racial polylogism
differs from Marxian polylogism only in so far as it ascribes to each
race a peculiar IogicaI structure of mind and n~aintainsthat all
members of a definite race, no matter what their class affiliation may
be, are endowed with this peculiar logical structure.
There is no need to enter here into a critique of the concepts social
class and race as applied by these doctrines. It is not necessary to ask
the @ ~ x i a n swhen and how a proletarian who succeeds in joining
the ranks of the bourgeoisie changes his proIetarian mind into a bourgeois mind. I t is superfluous to ask the racists to explain what kind
of logic is peculiar to people who are not of pure racial stock. There
are much more serious objections to be raised.
Neither the Marxians nor the racists nor the supporters of any
other brand of polyloaism ever went further than to declare that the
4
logical structure of mmd is different with various classes, races, or
nations. They never ventured to demonstrate precisely in what the
logic of the proletarians differs from the logic of the bourgeois, or in
what the logic of the Aryans differs from the logic of the non-Aryans,
or the logic of the Germans from the logic of the French or the British.
In the eyes of the Marxians the Ricardian theory of comparative cost
is spurious because Ricardo was a bourgeois. The German racists
condemn the same theory because Ricardo was a Jew, and the German nationalists because he was an Englishman. Some German professors advanced all these three arguments together against the validity
of Ricardo's teachings. How-ever, it is not enough to reject a theory
whoIesaIe by unmasking the background of its author. What is wanted
is first to expound a system of logic different from that applied by the
criticized author. Then it would be necessary to examine the contested theory point by point and to show where in its reasoning inferences are made which-although correct from the point of view of

76
Human Action
its author's logic-are invalid from the point of view of the proletarian, Aryan, or German logic. And finally, it should be explained
what kind of conclusions the replacement of the author's vicious inferences by the correct inferences of the critic's own logic must lead
to. As everybody knows, this never has been and never can be attempted by anybody.
Then there is the fact that there is disagreement concerning essential problems among people belonging to the same class, race, or
nation. Unfortunately there are, say the Nazis, Germans who do not
think in a correct German way. But if a German does not always
necessarily think as he should, but may think in the manner of a man
equipped with a non-German logic, who is to dccidc which German's
ideas are truly German and which un-German? Says the late Professor Franz Oppcnheimer: "The individual errs often in looking
after his interests; a class never errs in the long run." This would
suggest the infallibility of a majority vote. However, the Nazis
rejected decision by majority vote as manifestly un-German. T h e
Marxians pay lip service to the democratic principle of majority vote.4
But whenever it comes to a test they favor minority rule, provided
it is the rule of their own party. Let us remember how Lenin dispersed by force the Constituent AssembIy elected, under the auspices
of his own government. by universal franchise for men and women,
because only about one-fifth of its members wcre Bolshevik.
A consistent supporter of polylogism would have to maintain that
ideas are correct because their author is a member of the right class,
nation, or race. But consistency is not one of their virtues. Thus the
Marxians are prepared to a s s i b the epithet "prolctarian thinker" to
everybody whose doctrines they approve. All the others they disparage eiiher as foes of their class or as social traitors. Hitlcr was
even frank enough to admit that the only method available for him
to sift the true Germans from the mongrels and the aliens was to
enunciate a genuinely German program and to sec who wcre ready
c-

-..
.c,..

:* 5 .%

2"-1.

&":"-A

-."--.,L,-,

l.,,1:1.,

F,,t..,,"

l
.
.
.

,
,
,
,
"
,
,

3 U J U L L IL.
A C l d l n - I l d l l G U l l l d l l W I I U 3 G L J U U l l ) ' l G d L U l G 3 11)' I I U 1 1 1 L d l l 3
1't
fitted the prototype of the fair-haired Aryan master race, arrogated
to himself the gift of discovering the only doctrine adequate to the
German mind and of expelling from the raiksof the Germans all those
who did not accept this doctrine whatever their bodily characteristics
111

3. Cf. Franz Oppenheimer, System der Soziologie (Jena, 19261, 11, 559.
4. It must be emphasized that the case for democracy is not based on the

assumption that majorities are always right, still less that they are infallible.
Cf. below,, pp. 1 4 ~j1I.
5. Cf. hn speech on the Party Convention in Nuremberg, September 3, 1933
(Frankfurter Zeitung, September 4, 1933, P. 2).

Economics and the Revolt Against Reason

17

might be. N o further proof is needed of the insincerity of the whole
doctrine.

3. T h e Praxeological Aspect of Polylogism
An ideology in the Marxian sense of this term is a doctrine which,
although erroneous from the point of view of the correct logic
of the proletarians, is beneficial to the selfish interests of the class which
has developed it. An ideology is objectivel~vicious, but it furthers
the interests of the thinker's class precisely bn account of its viciousness. Many Marxians believe that they have proved this tenet by
stressing the point that people do not thirst for knowledge only for
its own sake. The aim of the scientist is to pave the way for successful action. Theories are always developed with a view to practical
application. There are no such things as pure science and the disinterested search for truth.
For the sake of argument we may admit that every effort to attain
truth is motivated by considerations of its practical utilization for
the attainment of some end. But this does not answer the question
why an "ideological"-i.e., a false-theory should render better service than a correct one. T h e fact that the practical application of a
theory results in the outcome predicted on the basis of this theory
is universally considered a confirmation of its correctness. I t is paradoxical to assert that a vicious theory is from any point of view more
usefuI than a correct one.
Men use firearms. In order to improve these weapons they developed the science of ballistics. But, of course, precisely because they
were eager to hunt game and to kill one another, a correct ballistics. A
merely "ideologica1" ballistics would not have been of any use.
For the Marxians the view that scientists labor for ltnowledge alone
is nothing but an "arrogant pretense" of the scientists. Thus they
declare that Maxwell was led to his theory of electromagnetic waves
by the craving of business for wireless telegraphs."t is of no relevance
for the problem of ideology whether this is true or not. T h e question
is whether the alleged fact that nineteenth-century industriaIism considered telegraphy without wires "the philosopher's stonc and the
elixir of youth" impelled Maxwell to formulate a correct theory
or an ideological superstructure of the selfish class interests of the
bourgeoisie. There is no doubt that bacteriological research was in6. Cf. I.ancelot Hogben, Science for the Citizen (New York, 1938), pp. 726728.

7. lbid., p. 726.

78

Human Action

stigated not only by the desire to fight contagious diseases, but also
by the desire of the producers of wine and of cheese to improve
their methods of production. But the result obtained was certainly
not "ideological" in the Marxian sense.
What induced hlarx to invent his ideology-doctrine was the wish
to sap the prestige of economics. He was fully aware of his impotence
to refute the objections raised by the economists to the practicability
of the socialist schemes. In fact he was so fascinated by the theoretical
system of British classical economics that he firmly believed in its
impregnability. H e either never learned about the doubts that the
classical theory of value raised in the minds of judicious scholars, or,
if he ever heard of them, he did not comprehend their weight. His
own economic ideas are hardly more than a garbled version of
Ricardianism. When Jevons and Menger inaugurated a new era of
economic thought, his career as an author of economic writings had
already come to an end; the first volume of 13as Kapital had already
been published several years previously. Marx's only reaction to the
marginal theory of value was that he postponed the publication of the
later volumes of his main treatise. They were made accessible to the
public only after his death.
In developing the ideology-doctrine Adarx exclusively aims at economics and the social philosophy of Ctilitarianism. His only intention was to destroy the reputation of economic teachings which he
was unable to refute by means of logic and ratiocination. He gave to
his doctrine the form of a universal law valid for the whole historical
age of social classes because a statement which is applicable only to
one individual historical event could not be considered as a law. For
the same reasons he did not restrict its validity to economic thought
only, but included every branch of knowledge.
T h e service which bourgeois economics rendered to the bourgeoisie was in Marx's eyes twofold. It aided then1 first in their fight
against feudalism and royal despotism and then later again in their
fight against the rising proletarian class. It provided a rational and
moral justification for capitalist exploitation. It was, if we want to use
a notion developed after Marx's death, a rationalization of the claims
of the capitalist^.^ The capitalists, in their subconsciousness ashamed
of the mean greed motivating their own conduct and anxious to
avoid social disapproval, encouraged their sycophants, the economists,
8. Although the term rationalization is new, the thing itself was known long
ago. Cf., for instance, the words of Benjamin Franklin: "So convenient a thing
it is t o be a reasonable creature, since it enables one t o find or make a reason for
every thing one has a mind to do." (Autobiography,ed. New York, 1944,P. 41.)

Economics and the Revolt Against Reason

79

to proclaim doctrines which could rehabilitate them in public
opinion.
Now, recourse to the notion of rationalization provides a psychological description of the incentives which impelled a man or a group
of men to formulate a theorem or a whole theory. But it does not predicate anything about the validity or invalidity of the theory advanced. If it is proved that the theory concerned is untenable, the
notion of rationalization is a psychological interpretation of the
causes which made their authors liable to error. But if we are not in a
position to find any fault in the theory advanced, no appeal to the
concept of rationalization can possibly explode its validity. If it were
true that the economists had in their subconsciousness no design
other than that of justifying the unfair claims of the capitalists, their
theories could nevertheless be quite correct. There is no means to expose a faulty theory other than to refute it by discursive reasoning and
to substitute a better theory for it. In dealing with the theorem of
Pythagoras or with the theory of comparative costs, we are not interested in the psychoIogica1 factors that impelled Pythagoras and
Ricardo to construct these theorems, although these things may be
important for the historian and the biographer. For science the only
relevant question is whether or not these theorems can stand the test
of rational examination. T h e social or racial background of their
authors is beside the point.
It is a fact that people in the pursuit of their selfish interests try to
use doctrines more or less universally accepted by public opinion.
Moreover, they are eager to invent and to propagate doctrines which
they could possibly use for furthering their own interests. But this
does not explain why such doctrines, favoring the interests of a
minority and contrary to the interests of the rest of the people, are
endorsed hy public opinion. N o matter whether such "ideological"
doctrines are the product of a "false consciousness," forcing a man
to think unwittingly in a manner that serves the interests of his class,
or whether they are the product of a purposeful distortion of truth,
they must encounter the ideologies of other classes and try to supplant them. Then a rivalry between antagonistic ideologies emerges.
The Marxians explain victory and defeat in such conflicts as an outcome of the interference of historical providence. Geist, the mythical
prime mover, operates according to a definite plan. He leads mankind through various preliminary stages to the final bliss of socialisnl.
Every stage is the product of a certain state of technology; a11 its other
characteristics are the necessary ideological superstructure of this
technological state. .Geist causes man to bring about in due time

80

Human Action

the technological ideas adequate to the stage in which he lives, and to
realize them. All the rest is an outgrowth of the state of technology.
The hand-mill made feudal society; the steam-mill made capitalis~n.~
Human will and reason play only an ancillary role in these changes.
The inexorable law of historical development forces men-independently of their wills-to think and to behave according to the patterns
corresponding to the material basis of their age. Men fool themselves
in bclicving that they are free to choose benveen various ideas and
between what they call truth and error. They themselves do not
think; it is historical providence that manifests itself in their thoughts.
'l'his is a purely mystical doctrine. The only proof given in its support is the recourse to Hegelian dialectics. Capitalist private property
is the first negation of individual private property. It begets, with the
inexorability of a law of nature, its own negation, namely common
ownership of the means of production.10 However, a mystical doctrine based on intuition does not lose its mysticism by referring to
another no less mystical doctrine. This makeshift by no means answers the question why a thinker must necessarily deveIop an ideology
in accordance with the interests of his class. For thc sake of argument
we may admit that man's thoughts must result in doctrines beneficial
to his interests. But are a rnan's interests necessarily identical with those
of his whole class? Marx himself had to admit that the organization
of the proletarians into a class, and consequently into a political
party, is continually being upset again by the competition between
the workers themselves.ll It is an undeniable fact that there prevails
an irreconcilable conflict of interests between those workers who are
cmployed at union wage rates and those who remain unemployed
because the enforcement of union rates prevents the demand for and
the supply of labor from finding the appropriate price for meeting.
It is no less true that the interests of the workers of the comparatively
overpopulated countries and those of the comparatively underpopulated countries are antagonistic with regard to migration barriers.
The statement that the interests of !a prG!etar-ar,s u n i f G r m ! x ~
J "'I""'
thc substitution of socialism for capitalism is an arbitrary postulate
of Marx and the other socia!ists. It cannot be proved by the mere assertion that the socialist idea is the emanation of proletarian thought
and thcrcfore certainly beneficial to the interests of the proletariat as
such.
9. "Le moulin i bras vous donnera la sociCtC avec le souzerain; le moulin
vo"17;vp

vapeur, la sociktk avec le capitaliste industriel." (Marx, Misire de la philosophie
(Paris and Brussels, 1847), p. 100.
10. Marx, Das Kapital (7th ed. Hamburg, 1914).pp. 7 2 g 7 2 9 .
r I . T h e Communist Manifesto, 1.

Econonzics and the Revolt Against Reason

8I

A popular interpretation of the vicissitudes of British foreign trade
policies, based on the ideas of Sismondi, Frederick List, M a n , and
the German Historical School, runs this way: In the second part
of the eighteenth century and in the greater part of the nineteenth
century the class interests of the British bourgeoisie required a free
trade policy. Therefore British political economy elaborated a free
trade doctrine, and the British manufacturers oiganined a popular
movement which finally succeeded in abolishing protective tariffs.
Then later conditions changed. T h e British bourgeoisie could no
longer stand the competition of foreign manufacturing and badly
needed protective tariffs. Consequently the economists substituted
a theory of protection for the antiquated free trade ideology, and
Great Britain returned to protectionism.
T h e first error in this interpretation is that it considers the "bourgeoisie'' as a homogeneous class composed of mcrnbcrs whose interests are identical. A businessman is always under the necessity of adjusting the conduct of his business to the institutional conditions of
his country. In the long run he is, in his capacity as entrepreneur and
capitalist, neither favored nor injured by tariffs or the absence of
tariffs. H e will turn to the production of those commodities which
under the given state of affairs he can most profitably produce. What
may hurt or further his short-run interests are only changes in the
institutional setting. But such changes do not affect the various
branches of business and the various enterpriscs in the same way and
t o the same extent. A measure that benefits one branch or enterprise
may be detrimental to other branches or entcrprises. What counts
for a businessman is only a limited number of customs items. And
with regard to these items the interests of various branches and firms
arc mostly antagonistic.
It is not true that in the years of the supremacy of free trade ideas
the interests of all branches of British manufacturing were homogeneous and could be uniformly favored by the abandonment of protec,L .I U.I.~ I S ~L .r V L uiu
A-A *
I
.
,
,
,
,-I.,- *IL.,~ I Gn,:,:-L
L t l G fdLt. LUL
IJILIW
plants were thii techrioIorrb
icalIy far ahead of the plants of the rest of the world rcnder foreign
competition innocuous for them. Today the American pIants enjoy
a similar superiority. Nevertheless a great part of American manufacturing believes that they badly need protection against the backward industries of other countries.
T h e interests of every branch or firm can be favored by 311 kinds
of
granted to it b y the government. But if privileges are
granted to the same extent t o the other branches and firms, every
businessman loses-not only in his capacity as consumer, but also in
XT,

82

Human Action

his capacity as buyer of raw materials, half-finished products, machines and other equipment-on the one hand as much as he profits
on the other. Selfish group interests may impel a man to ask for
protection for his own branch or firm. They can never motivate him
to ask for universal protection for all branches or firms if he is not
sure to be protected to a greater extent than the other industries or
enterprises.
Neither were the British manufacturers from the point of view of
their class concerns more interested in the abolition of the Corn Laws
than other British citizens. T h e landowners were opposed to the repeal
of these laws because a lowering of the prices for agricultural
products reduced the rent of land. A special class interest of the
manufacturers can only be construed on the basis of the long since
discarded iron law of wages and the no less untenable doctrine that
profits are an outcome of the exploitation of the workers.
Within a world organized on the basis of the division of labor,
every change must in one way or another effect the short-run interests of many groups. It is therefore always easy to expose every
doctrine supporting an alteration of existing conditions as an "ideological" disguise of the selfish interests of a special group of people.
The main occupation of many present-day authors is such unmasking. Marx did not invent this procedure. It was known long before
him. Its most curious manifestation was the attempts of some eighteenth-century writers to explain religious creeds as a fraudulent deception on the part of the priests eager to gain power and wealth both
for themselves and for their allies, the exploiters. T h e Marxians endorsed this statement in labeling religion "opium for the masses." l2
It never occurred to the supporters of such teachings that where
there are selfish interests pro there must necessarily be selfish interests contra too. It is by no means a satisfactory explanation of any
event that it favored a special class. The question to be answered is
why the rest of the population whose interests it injured did not
frCstratiEgthe ende2vers of these favored h-7 it
succeed ir?
Y
Every firm and every branch of business is in the short run interested in increased sales of its products. In the long run, however,
there prevails a tendency toward an equalization of returns in the
various branches of production. If demand for the products of a
branch increases and raises profits, more capital flows into it and
12. The meaning that contemporary Marxism attaches to this phrase, viz., that
the religious drug has been purposely administered to the people, may have
been the meaning of Marx too. But it was not implied in the passage in which
-in 1843-Marx coined this phrase. Cf. R. P. Cascy, Religion in Rassia (New
York, I 946), pp. 67-69.

Economics and the Revolt Against Reason

83

the competition of the new enterprises cuts down the profits. Profits
are b y no means higher in the sale of socially detrimental articles
than in the sale of socially beneficial articles. If a certain branch of
business is outlawed and those engaged in it risk prosecution, pcnalties,
and imprisonment, gross profits must be high enough to compensate
for the risks involved. But this does not interfere with the height of
net returns.
The rich, the owners of the already operating plants, have no particular class interest in the maintenance of free competition. They
are opposed to confiscation and expropriation of their fortunes, but
their vested interests are rather in favor of measures preventing newcomers from challenging their position. 'Those fighting for free enterprise and free competition do not defend the interests of those rich
today. They want a free hand left to unknown men who will be the
entrepreneurs of tomorrow and whose ingenuity will make the life
of coming generations more agreeable. They want the way left open
to further economic improvements. They are the spokesmen of
progress.
T h e nineteenth-century success of free trade ideas was effected
b y the theories of classical economics. T h e prestige of these ideas
was so great that those whose selfish class interests they hurt could
not hinder their endorsement by public opinion and their reahation
b y legislative measures. lt is ideas that make history, and not history
that makes ideas.
I t is useless to argue with mystics and seers. T h e y base their assertions on intuition and are not prepared to submit them to rational
examination. T h e Marxians pretend that what their inner voice proclaims is history's self-revelation. If other people do not hear this
voicc, it is only a proof that they are not chosen. I t is insolence that
those groping in darkness dare to contradict the inspired ones. Decency should impel them to creep into a corner and keep silent.
~ o w e v e r ,science cannot abstain from thinking although it is
obvious that it will never succeed in convincing those who dispute
the supremacy of reason. Science must emphasize that the appeal to
intuition cannot settle the question which of several antagonistic
doctrines is the right one and which are wrong. I t is an undeniable fact
that Marxism is not thc only doctrine advanced in our time. There
arc other "ideologies" besides Marxism. T h e hlarxians assert that the
application of these other doctrines would hurt the interests of the
many. But the supporters of these doctrines say precisely the same
with regard to Marxism.
Of course, the Marxians consider a doctrine vicious if their author's

84

Human Action

background is not proletarian. But who is proletarian? Doctor Marx,
the manufacturer and "exploiter" Engels, and Lenin, the scion of the
Russian gentry, were certainly not of proletarian background. But
I-Iitler and Mussolini were genuine proletarians and spent their youth
in poverty. T h e conflict of the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks or that
between Stalin and Trotsky cannot be presented as class conflicts.
They were conflicts between various sects of fanatics who called
one another traitors.
T h e essence of Marxian philosophy is this: W e are right because
we are the spolrcsmen of the rising proletarian class. Discursive reasoning cannot invalidate our teachings, for they are inspired by the
supreme pourer that determincs the destiny of mankind. Our adversaries are wrong because they lack the intuition that guides our
minds. I t is, of course, not their fault that on account of their class
affiliation they are not equipped with the genuine proIetarian logic
and are blinded by ideologies. T h e unfathomable decrees of history
that have elected us have doomed them. T h e future is ours.

4. Racial Polylogism
Marxian polylogism is an abortive makeshift to salvage the untenable doctrines of socialism. Its attempt to substitute intuition for
ratiocination appeals to popular superstitions. But it is precisely this
attitude that places Marxian polylogism and its offshoot, the socalled "sociology of Itnowledge," in irreconcilable antagonism to
science and reason.
It is different with the polylogism of the racists. This brand of
polylogism is in agreement with fashionable, although mistaken, tendencies in present-day empiricism. It is an established fact that mankind is divided into various races. T h e races differ in bodily features.
Materialist philosophers assert that thoughts are a secretion of the
brain as bile is a secretion of the gall-bladder. It would be inconsistent
for them to reject beforehand the hypothesis that the thought-secretion of the various races may differ in essential qualities. T h e fact that
anatomy has not succeeded up to now in discovcring anatomical
differences in the brain cells of various races cannot invalidate the
doctrine that the logical structure of mind is different with different
races. It does not exclude the assumption that later research may discover such anatomical peculiarities.
Some ethnologists tell us that it is a mistake to speak of higher and
lower civilizations and of an alleged backwardness of alien races. T h e

Econonzics and the Revolt Against Reason

85

civilization of various races are different from the Western civilization of the peoples of Caucasian stock, but they are not inferior. Every
race has its peculiar mentality. I t is faulty to apply to the civilization
of any of them yardsticks abstracted from the achievements of
other races. Westerners call the civilization of China an arrested
civilization and that of the inhabitants of New Guinea primitive barbarism. But the Chinese and the natives of K c w Guinea despise our
civilization no less than we despise theirs. Such estimates are judgments of value and hence arbitrary. Those other races have a diffcrent
structure of mind. Their civilizations are adequate to their mind as
our civilization is adequate to our mind. W e are incapable of comprehending that what we call backwardness docs not appcar such
t o them. It is, from the point of view of their logic, a better method
of coming to a satisfactory arrangement with given natural conditions of life than is our progressivism.
These ethnologists are right in emphasizing that it is not the task of
a historian-and the ethnologist too is a historian-to express value
judgments. Rut they are utterly mistaken in contending that these
other races have been guided in their activities by motives other than
those which have actuated the white race. The Asiatics and the
Africans no less than the peoples of European descent have been eager
t o struggle successfully for survival and to use reason as the foremost weapon in these endeavors. They have sought to get rid of the
beasts of prey and of disease, to prevent famines and to raise the
productivity of labor. There can be no doubt that in the pursuit of
these aims they have been less successful than the whites. T h e proof
is that they aEc eager to profit from all achievements of the West.
Those ethnologists would be right, if Mongols or Africans, tormentcd
b y a painful disease, were to renounce the aid of a European doctor
because their mentality or their world view led them to believe
that it is better to suffer than to be relieved of pain. Mahatma Gandhi
disavowed his whole philosophy when he cntered a modern hospital
to be treated for appendicitis.
T h e hTorth American Indians lacked the ingenuity to invent the
wheel. T h e inhabitants of the AIps were not keen knough to construct skis which would have rendered their hard life much more
agreeable. Such shortcomings were not due to a mentality different
from those of the races which had long since used whecls and skis;
they were faihres, even when judged from the point of view of the
Indians and the Alpine mountaineers.
However, these considerations refer only to the motives determin-

86

Human Action

ing concrete actions, not to the only relcvant problem of whether
or not there exists between various races a difference in the logical
structure of mind. It is precisely this that the racists assert.13
W e may refer to what has been said in the preceding chapters about
the fundamentaI issues of the logical structure of mind and the
categorial principles of thought and action. Some additional observations will suffice to give the finishing stroke to racial polylogism and
to any other brand of polylogism.
The categories of human thought and action are neither arbitrary
products of the human mind nor conventions. They are not outside
of the universe and of the course of cosmic events. They are biological
facts and have a definite function in life and rcality. They are instruments in man's struggle for existence and in his endeavors to
adjust himself as much as possible to the real state of the universe and
to remove uneasiness as much as it is in his power to do so. They are
therefore appropriate to the structure of thc external world and reflect
properties of the world and of rcality. They work, and are in this
sense true and valid.
It is consequently incorrect to assert that aprioristic insight and
pure reasoning do not convey any information about reality and the
structure of the universe. The fundamental logical relations and the
categories of thought and action are the ultimate source of all human
knowledge. They are adequate to the structure of reality, they rcveal
this structure to the human mind and, in this sense, they are for man
basic ontological facts.14 W e do not know what a superhuman inteIlect may think and comprehend. For man every cognition is conditioned by the logical structure of his mind and ihplied in this structure. I t is precisely the satisfactory results of the empirical sciences
and their practical application that evidence this truth. Within the
orbit in which human action is able to attain ends aimed at there is no
room left for agnosticism.
If there had been races which had devdoped a different logical
stixcyLire of
they -would Elave failed in ;he use of reasoil as ail
aid in the struggle for existence. The only means for survival that
could have protected them against extermination would have been
their instinctive reactions. Natural selection would have eliminated
those specimens of such races that tried to employ their reasoning
for the direction of behavior. Alone those individuals would have
survived that rclied upon instincts only. This means that only those
13. Cf.L.G.Tirala. Rasse, Geist und Seek (Munich, 193 j), pp. 190ff.
rq. Cf.Morris R.Cohen, Reason and Nature (NewYork, r q j r ) , pp. tor-zoj;
A Preface to Logic (New Yorlc, rg44), PP. 4z-44,54-56,9tl I 80-187.

Economics and the Revolt Against Reason

87

would have had a chance to survive that did not rise above the mental
level of animals.
T h e scholars of the West have amassed an enormous amount of
material concerning the high civilizations of China and India and the
primitive civilizations of the Asiatic, American, Australian, and African aborigines. I t is safe to say that all that is worth knowing about
these races is known. But never has any supporter of polylogism tried
to use these data for a description of the allegedly different logic of
these peoples and civilizations.

5 . Polylogism and Understanding
Some supporters of the tenets of Marxism and racism interpret the
epistemological teachings of their parties in a peculiar way. They are
ready to admit that the logical structure of mind is uniform for all
races, nations, and classes. Marxism or racism, they assert, never intended to deny this undeniable fact. W7hat they really wanted to say
was that historical understanding, aesthetic empathy, and value judgments are conditioned by a man's background. I t is obvious that this
interpretation cannot be supported on the basis of the writings of the
champions of poIylogism. However, it must be analyzed as a doctrine
of its own.
There is no need to emphasize again that a man's value judgments
and his choice of ends reflect his inborn bodily features and all the
But it is a far cry from acknowlcdgment of
vicissitudes of his
this fact to the beIief that racial inheritance or class affiliation ultimately determines judgments of value and the choice of ends. T h e
fundamental discrepancies in world view and patterns of behavior
d o not correspond to differences in race, nationality, or class affiliation.
There is hardIy any greater divergence in value judgments than
that benveen the ascetics and those eager to enjoy life lightheartedly.
An unbridgeable guif separates devout monks and nuns from the rest
of mankind. But there have been people dedicated to the monkish
ideals among all races, nations, classes, and castes. Some of them were
sons and daughters of kings and wealthy noblemen, others were beggars. St. Francis, Santa Clara, and their ardent followers were natives
of Italy, whose other inhabitants cannot be described as weary of
temporal things. Puritanism was Anglo-Saxon, but so was the lasciviousness of the British under the Tudors, the Stuarts, and the Hanoverians. T h e nineteenth century's outstanding champion of asceti15. Cf. above, pp. 4 6 4 7 .

Human Action
cism was Count Leo Tolstoy, a wealthy member of the profligate Russian aristocracy. Tolstoy saw the pith of the philosophy he attacked
embodied in Beethoven's Kreutzer Sonata, a ~nasterpieceof the son
of extremely poor parents.
It is the same with aesthetic values. All races and nations have had
both classic and romantic art. With all their ardent propaganda the
Marxians have not succeedcd in bringing about a specifically proletarian art or literature. The "proletarian" writers, painters, and musicians have not created new styles and have not established new
aesthetic values. What characterizes them is solely their tendency to
call everything they detest "bourgeois" and everything they like
"proletarian."
Historical understanding both of the historian and of the acting
man always reflects the personality of its author.1° But if the historian
and the politician are imbued with the desire for truth, they will
never let themselves be deluded by party bias, provided they are
efficient and not inept. It is immaterial whether a historian or a politician considers the interference of a certain factor beneficial or
detrimental. He cannot derive any advantage from underrating or
overrating the relevance of one of the operating factors. Only clumsy
would-be historians believe that they can serve their cause by distortion. The biographies of Napoleon I and 111, of Bismarck, Marx,
Gladstone, and Disraeli, the most disputed personalities of the past
century, widely disagree with regard to value judgments; but they
hardly disagree in their understanding of the role played by these
men.
This is no less true of the statesman's understanding. What use
could a champion of Protestantism derive from misunderstanding
the tremendous power and prestige of Catholicism, or a liberal from
misunderstanding the relevance of socialist ideas? In order to succeed a politician must see things as they are; whoever indulges in
wishful thinking will certainly fail. Judgments of relevance differ
friiiii jiibginents of d u e i i l that they aim a t the aI~praisaiof a state
of affairs not dependent on the author's arbitrariness. They are
colored by their author's personality and can therefore never be unanimously agreed upon by all people. But here again we must raise the
question: What advantage could a race or class derive from an
"ideological" distortion of understanding?
As has already been pointed out, the serious discrepancies to be
found in historical studies are an outcome of differences in the field
16. Cf. above, pp. 57-58.

Economics and the Revolt Against Reason
of the nonhistorical sciences and not in various modes of understanding.
Today many historians and writers are imbued with the Marxian
dogma that the realization of the socialist plans is both unavoidable
and the supreme good, and that the labor movement is entrusted with
the historical mission of accomplishing this task by a violent overthrow of the capitalist system. Starting from this tenet they take it
as a matter of course that the parties of the "Left," the elect, in the
pursuit of their policies, should resort to acts of violence and to
murder. A revolution cannot be consummated by peaceful methods.
I t is not worth while to dwell upon such trifles as the butchering of
the four daughters of the last Tsar, of Leon Trotsky, of tens of thousands of Russian bourgeois and so on. "You can't make an omelet
without breaking eggs"; why explicitly mention the eggs broken?
But, of course, it is different if one of those assailed ventures to defend himself or even to strike back. Few only mention the acts of
sabotage, destruction, and violence committed by strikers. But a11
authors enlarge upon the attempts of railroad companies to protect
thcir property and the lives of their officers and their customers
against such onslaughts.
Such discrepancies are due neither to judgments of value nor to
differences in understanding. T h e y are thc outcome of antagonistic
theories of economic and historical evolution. If the coming of socialism is unavoidabIe and can be achieved only b y revolutionary methods, murders committed by the "progressives" are minor incidents
of no significance. But the self-defense and counterattacks of the "reactionaries" which can possibly delay the final victory of socialism
are of the greatest importance. They are remarkable events, while
the revolutionary acts are simply routine.

6. The Case for Reason
Judicious rationalists do not pretend that human reason can ever
mala man omniscient. They are fully aware of the fact that, however knowIedge may increase, there will always remain things ultimatelv given and not liable to any further elucidation. But, they say,
as farhs man is able to attain cognition, he must rely upon reason. T h e
ultimate given is the irrational. T h e knowable is, as far it is known already, necessarily rational There is neither an irrational mode of
cognition nor a science of irrationality.
With regard to unsolved problen~s,various hypotheses are per-

Human Action

90

missible provided they do not contradict logic and the uncontested
data of experience. But these are hypotheses only.
We do not know what causes the inborn diffcrences in human
abilitics. Science is at a loss to explain why Newton and Mozart were
full of creative genius and why most people are not. Bnt it is by all
means an unsatisfactory answer to say that a genius owes his greatness to his ancestry or to his race. The qucstion is precisely why such
a man differs from his brothers and from the other members of his
race.
It is a little bit less faulty to attribute the great achievements of
the white race to racial snperiority. Yet this is no more than a vague
hypothesis which is at variance with the fact that the foundations of
modern civilization were laid by pcoples of other races. W e cannot
Imow whcther or not at a later date other raccs will suppIant Western
civjlization.
However, such a hypothesis must be appraised on its own merits.
Jt must not be condernnyd beforehand because the racists base on it
their postulate that there is an irrcconcilahle conflict between various
racial groups and that the superior races must enslave the inferior ones.
Ricardo's law of association has long since discardcd this mistal\.cn
interpretation of thc inequality of men.17 It is nonsensical to fiqht the
racial hypothesis by negating obvious facts. It is vain to denv that up
to now certain races have contributed nothing or very Iittle to the
development of civilization and can, in this sense, be called inferior.
If somebody were eager to distill at any cost a grain of truth out
of the Marxian teachings. he could say tha; emotions influence a man's
reasoning very much. Nobody ever vcntured to deny this obvious
fact, and ~ a i x i s mcannot be credited with its discovcry. Rut it is
without anv significance for epistemology. There are many sources
both of success and of crror. It is the task of psychology to enumerate
and to classify thcm.
Envy is a widesprcad frailty. It is certain that many intellectuals
envy thc higher income of prosperous businessmen and that these
fcelings drive them toward socialism. They believe that the authorities of a socialist commonwealth would pa): them higher salaries than
those that they earn under capitalism. But to provc the existcnce of
this envy does not relieve science of the duty of making the most careful examination of the socialist doctrines. Scicntists are bound to deal
with every doctrine as if its supporters were inspired by nothing
else than thc thirst for knowledge. The various brands of polylogism
substitute for a purely theorctical examination of opposite doctrines
17.

See below, pp. 158-163.

Economics and the Revolt Against Reason

91

the unmasking of the background and the motives of their authors.
Such a procedure is incompatible with the first principles of ratiocination.
It is a poor makeshift to dispose of a theory by referring to its historical background, to the "spirit" of its time, to the material conditions of the country of its origin, and to any personal qualities of its
authors. A theory is subject to the tribunal of reason only. The yardstick to be applied is always the yardstick of reason. A theory is either
correct or incorrect. It may happen that the present state of our
knowledge does not allow a decision with regard to its correctness or
incorrectness. But a theory can never be valid for a bourgeois or an
American if it is invalid for a proletarian or a Chinese.
If the Marxians and the racists were right, it would be impossible
to explain why those in power are anxious to suppress dissenting
theories and to persecute their supporters. The very fact that there
are intolerant governments and political parties intent upon outlawing and exterminating dissenters, is a proof of the excellence of
reason. It is not a proof of a doctrine's correctness that its adversaries
use the police, the hangman, and violent mobs to fight it. But it is a
proof of the fact that those taking recourse to violent oppression are
in their subconsciousness convinced of the untenability of their own
doctrines.
It is impossible to demonstrate the validity of the a priori foundations of logic and praxeology without referring to these foundations themselves. Reason is an ultimate given and cannot be analyzed
or questioned by itself. The very existence of human reason is a nonrational fact. The only statement that can be predicated with regard
to reason is that it is the mark that distinguishes man from animals
and has brought about everything that is specifically human.
T o those pretending that man would be happier if he were to
renounce the use of reason and try to let himself be guided by intuition and instincts only, no other answer can bc given than an analysis
of the rrracture of Immm society: In descdhing the genesis md.wnrking of social cooperation, economics provides all the mformatlon required for an ultimate decision between reason and unreason. If man
reconsiders freeing himself from the supremacy of reason, hc must
know what he will have to forsake.

1V. A FIRST AhTALYSIS OF T H E CATEGORY
OF ACTION
I.

Ends and Means

HE result sought by an action is called its end, goal, or aim. One

T

uses these terms in ordinary speech also to signify intermediate
ends, goals, or aims; these are points which acting man wants to attain only because he believes that he will reach his ultimate end, goal,
or aim in passing beyond them. StrictIy speaking the end, goal, or
aim of any action is always the relief from a felt uneasiness.
A means is what serves to the attainment of any end, goal, or aim.
Means are not in the given universe; in this universe there exist only
things. A thing becomes a means when human reason plans to employ
it for the attainment of some end and human action really employs
it for this purpose. Thinking man sees the serviceableness of things,
i.e., their ability to minister to his ends, and acting man makes them
means. It is of primary importance to realize that parts of the external world become means only through the operation of the human
mind and i s offshoot, human action. External objects are as such
only phenomena of the physical universe and the subject matter of
the natural sciences. It is human meaning and action which transform them into means. Praxeology does not deaI with the external
world, but with man's conduct with regard to it. Praxeological reality
is not the physical universe, but man's conscious reaction to the
given state of this universe. Economics is not about things and tano
i h l ~mqterial r r
h i n r t r . ;+
men the;" meanings and acdGns.
b"'""
" ;c ahmat """,
J
Goods, commodities, and wealth and all the other notions of conduct are not elements of nature; they are elements of human meaning and conduct. H e who wants to deal with them must not look at
the external world; he must search for them in the meaning of acting
men .
Praxeology and economics do not deal with human meaning and
action as they should be or would be if all men were inspired by an
absolutely valid philosophy and equipped with a perfect knowledge
of technology. For such notions as absolute validity and omniscience
"'"L"""'

"U'",

'U

""""L

L"-'L

I..~LLI.I.I

A Fisst Analysis of the Category of Action

93
there is no room in the frame of a science whose subject matter is
erring man. An end is everything which men aim at. A means is
every thing which acting men consider as such.
It is the task of scientific technology and therapeutics to explodc
errors in their respective fields. It is the task of economics to expose
erroneous doctrines in the field of social action. But if men do not
follow the advice of science, but cling to their fallacious prejudices,
these errors are reality and must be dealt with as such. Economists
consider foreign exchange control as inappropriate to attain the ends
aimed at by those who take recourse to it. However, if public opinion
does not abandon its delusions and governments consequently resort
to foreign exchange control, the course of events is determined by
this attitude. Present-day medicine considers the doctrine of the
therapeutic effects of mandrake as a fable. But as long as people took
this fable as truth, mandrake was an economic good and prices were
paid for its acquisition. In dealing with prices economics does not
ask what things are in the eyes of other people, but only what they
are in the meaning of those intent upon getting them. For it deals
with real prices, paid and received in real transactions, not with prices
as they would be if men were different from what they really are.
Means are necessarily always limited, i.e., scarce with regard to
the services for which man wants to use them. If this were not the
case, there would not be any action with regard to them. Where man
is not restrained by the insufficient quantity of things available, there
is no need for any action.
It is customary to call the end the ultimate good and the means
goods. In applying this terminology economists mainly used to think
as technologists and not as praxeologists. They differentiated between free goods and economic goods. They called free goods things
available in superfluous abundance which man does not need t o
economize. Such goods are, however, not the object of any action.
They are general conditions of human welfare; they are parts of the
natural environment in which man lives and acts. Only the economic
goods are the substratum of action. They alone are dealt with in
econon~ics.
Economic goods which in themselves are fitted to satisfy human
wants directly and whose serviceableness does not depend on the
cooperation of other economic goods, are called consumers' goods or
goods of the first order. Means which can satisfy wants only indirectly
when complemcntcd by cooperation of other goods are called produccrs' goods or factors of production or goods of a remoter or
higher order. The services rendered by a producers' good consist

Human Action

94

in bringing about, by the cooperation of complementary producers'
goods, a product. This product may be a consumers' good; it may be
a producers' good which when combined with other producers' goods
will finally bring about a consumers' good. It is possible to think of the
producers' goods as arranged in orders according to their proximity
to the consumers' good for whose production they can be used. Those
producers' goods which are nearest to the production of a consumers'
good are ranged in the second order, and accordingly those which are
used for the production of goods of the second order in the third order
and so on.
T h e purpose of such an arrangement of goods in orders is to provide a basis for the theory of value and prices of the factors of production. It will be shown later how the valuation and the prices of
the goods of higher orders are dependent on the valuation and the
prices of the goods of lower orders produced by their expenditure.
The first and ultimate valuation of external things refers only to
consumers' goods. All other things are vaIued according to the part
they play in the production of consumers' goods.
It is therefore not necessary actually to arrange producers' goods
in various orders from the second to the nth. It is no less superfluous to
enter into pedantic discussions of whether a concrete good has to be
called a good of the lowest order or should rather be attributed to one
of the higher orders. Whether raw coffee beans or roast coffee beans
or ground coffee or coffee prepared for drinking or only coffee prepared and mixed with cream and sugar are to be called a consumers'
good ready for consumption is of no importance. It is immaterial
which manner of speech we adopt. For with regard to the problem
of valuation, all that we say about a consumers' good can be applied
to any good of a higher order (except those of the highest order) if we
consider it as a product.
An economic good does not necessarily have to be embodied in a
tangible thing. Nonmaterial economic goods are called services.
2.

T h e Scale of Value

Acting man chooses between various opportunities offered for
choice. H e prefers one alternative to others.
It is customary to say that acting man has a scale of wants or values
in his mind when he arranges his actions. On the basis of such a scale
he satisfies what is of higher value, i.e., his more urgent wants, and
leaves unsatisfied what is of lower value, i.e., what is a less urgent want.

A First Analysis of the Category of Action

95

There is no objection to such a presentation of the state of affairs.
However, one must not forget that the scale of vaIues or wants manifests itself only in the reality of action. These scaIes have no independent existence apart from the actual behavior of individuals. The
only source from which our knowIedge concerning these scales is derived is the observation of a man's actions. Every action is always
in perfect agreement with the scale of values or wants because these
scales are nothing but an instrument for the interpretation of a man's
acting.
Ethical doctrines are intent upon establishing scales of value according to which man should act but does not necessarily always act.
They claim for themselves the vocation of telling right from wrong
and of advising man concerning what he should aim at as the supreme
good. They are normative disciplines aiming at the cognition of
what ought to be. They are not neutral with regard to facts; they
judge them from the point of view of freely adopted standards.
This is not the attitude of praxeology and economics. They are
fully awarc of the fact that the ultimate ends of human action are not
open to examination from any absolute standard. Ultimate ends are
ultimately given, they are purely subjective, they differ with various
people and with the same people at various moments in their lives.
Praxeology and economics deal with the means for the attainment of
ends chosen by the acting individuals. They do not express any
opinion with regard to such problems as whether or not sybaritism
is better than asceticism. They apply to the means only one yardstick, viz., whether or not they are suitablc to attain the ends at which
the acting individuals aim.
The notions of abnormality and perversity therefore have no place
in economics. It does not say that a man is perverse because he prefers
the disagreeable, the detrimental, and the painful to the agreeable, the
beneficial, and the pleasant. It says only that he is different from other
people; that he likes what others detest; that he considers useful what
other': want to avnid; chat he takes pleasure it: endwing pain which
others avoid because it hurts them. The polar notions normal and
perverse can be used anthropoIogically for the distinction between
those who behave as most people do and outsiders and atypical exceptions; they can be applied biologically for the distinction between
those whose behavior preserves the vital forces and those whose behavior is self-destructive; they can be appIied in an ethical sense for
the distinction between those who behave correctly and those who
act otherwise than they should. However, in the frame of a theoretical

96

Human Action

science of human action, there is no room for such a distinction. Any
examination of ultimate ends turns out to be purely subjective anc!
therefore arbitrary.
Value is the importance that acting man attaches to ultimate ends.
Only to ultimate ends is primary and original value assigned. Means are
valued derivatively according to their serviceableness in contributing
to the attainment of ultimate ends. Their valuation is derived from the
valuation of the respective ends. They are important for man only
as far as they make it possible for him to attain some ends.
Value is not intrinsic, it is not in things. It is within us; it is the
way in which man reacts to the conditions of his environment.
Neither is value in words and in doctrines. I t is reflected in human
conduct. I t is not what a man or groups of men say about value that
counts, but how they act. T h e bombastic oratory of moraIists and
the inflated pompousness of party programs are significant as such.
But they influence the course of human events only as far as they
really determine the actions of men.

3. The Scale of Needs
Notwithstanding all declarations to the contrary, the immense majority of men aim first of all a t an improvement of the material conditions of well-being. They want more and better food, better homes
and clothes, and a thousand other amenities. They strive after abundance and health. Taking these goals as given, applied physiology tries
to determine what means are best suited to provide as much satisfaction as possibIe. I t distinguishes, from this point of view, between man's "real" needs and imaginary and spurious appetites. It
teaches people how they should act and what they should aim at as a
means.
T h e importance of such doctrines is obvious. From his point of
view the physiologist is right in distinguishing between sensible action
and action contrary to purpose. Fie is right in contrasting judicious
methods of nourishment from unwise methods. H e may condemn
certain modes of behavior as absurd and opposed to "real" needs.
However, such judgments are beside the point for a science dealing
with the reality of human action. Not what a man should do, but
what he does, counts for praxeology and economics. Hygiene may be
right or wrong in calling alcohol and nicotine poisons. But economics
must explain the prices of tobacco and liquor as they are, not as they
would be under different conditions.
There is no room left in the field of economics for a scale of

A First Analysis of the Category of Action

97

needs different from the scale of values as reflected in man's actual
behavior. Economics deals with real man, weak and subject to error
as he is, not with ideal beings, omniscient and perfect as only gods
could be.
4. Action as an Exchange

Action is an attempt to substitute a more satisfactory state of affairs for a less satisfactory one. W e call such a wilIfully induced alteration an exchange. A less desirable condition is bartered for a
more desirable. What gratifies less is abandoned in order to attain
something that pleases more. That which is abandoned is called the
price paid for the attainment of the end sought. T h e value of the
price paid is calIed costs. Costs are equal to the value attached to the
satisfaction which one must forego in order to attain the end aimed
at.
T h e difference between the value of the price paid (the costs incurred) and that of the goal attained is called gain or profit or net
yield. Profit in this primary sense is purely subjectivc, it is an increase
in the acting man's happiness, it is a psychical phenomenon that can
be neither measured nor weighed. There is a more and a less in the
removal of uneasiness felt; but how much one satisfaction surpasses
another one can onIy be felt; it cannot be establishcd and determined
in an objective way. A judgment of value does not measure, it arranges in a scale o i degrees, it grades. I t is expressive of an order of
preference and sequencc, but not expressive of measure and weight.
Only the ordinal numbers can be applied to it, but not the cardinal
numbers.
It is vain to speak of any calculation of values. Calculation is possible only with cardinal numbers. T h e difference between the valuation of two states of affairs is entirely psychical and personal. It is
not open to any projection into the external world. It can be sensed
only by the individual. I t cannot be communicated or imparted to
any fellow- man. It is an intensive magnitude.
~h~siology
and psychology have developed various methods by
means of which they pretend to have attained a substitute for the
unfeasible measurement of intensive magnitudes. There is no need
for economics to enter into an examination of these rather questionable makeshifts. Their supporters themselves realize that they are not
applicable to value judgments. But even if they were, they would not
have any bearing on economic problems. For economics deals with
action as such, and not with the psychicaI facts that result in definite
actions.

98
Hunzarz Action
It happens again and again that an action does not attain the end
soughr. Sometimes the result, although inferior to the end aimed at,
is still an improvcmcnt when comparcd with the previous state of
affairs; then therc is still a profit, although a smaller onc than that
expcctcd. But it can happen that the action produces a statc of affairs
less desirablc than the previous statc it was intendcd to alter. Then
the difference between the valuation of the rcsult and the costs incurred is called loss.

V. TIME
I.

T h e TemporaI Character of Praxeology

H E notion of change implies the notion of temporal sequence. A

T

rigid, eternally immutable universe would be out of t h e , but
it would be dead. T h e concepts of change and of time are inseparably
linked together. Action aims at change and is therefore in the
temporal order. I-Iurnan reason is even ~ncapableof conceiving the
ideas of timeless existence and of timeless action.
H e w h o acts distinguishes between the time before the action,
the time absorbed by the action, and the time after the action has
been finished. H e cannot be neutral with regard t o the lapse of
time.
Logic and mathematics deal with an ideal system of thought. T h e
relations and implications of their system are coexistent and interdcpendent. W e may say as n-cll that thev are synchronous or that they
are out of time. A pcrfect mind coulc<grasp them all in one thought.
Man's inability t o accomplish this n~altcsthinking itself an action. proceeding step by step from the less satisfactory state of insufficient
cognition to the more satisfactory state of better insight. But the
temporal order in which knowledge is acquired must not be confused
with the logical simultaneity of a11 parts of this aprioristic deductive
svstein. Within this systcm the notions of anteriority and consequence
a& metaphorical only. T h e y d o not refer to the svstem, but to our
action in grasping it. T h e system itself implies neithkr the category of
time nor that of causality. There is functional correspondence between elements, but there is neither cause nor effect.
What distinguishes the praxeological svstem from the logical system epistemologically is precisely that it implies the categories both of
timc and of causality. T h e praxeological system too is aprioristic and
deductive. As a svstem it is out of time. But change is one of its elements. T h e notions of sooner and later and of cause and effect are
among its constituents. Anteriority and consequence are essential
concepts of praxeological reasoning. So is the irreversibility of events.
In the frame of the praxeological system any reference to functionaI
correspondence is no less metaphbrical and misleading than is the

Human Action

100

reference to anteriority and consequence in the frame of the logical
system.'
2.

Past, Present, and Future

11 is acting that provides man with the notion of tirne and makes
him aware of the flux of time. The idea of time is a praxeological
category.
Action is always directed toward the future; it is essentially and
necessarily always a planning and acting for a better future. Its aim
is always to render future conditions more satisfactory than they
would be without the interference of action. The uneasiness that
inipels a man to act is caused by a dissatisfaction with expected future
conditions as they would probably develop if nothing were done to
alter them. In any case action can influence only thc future, never
the present that with every infinitesimal fraction of a second sinks
down into the past. Man becomes conscious of time when he plans to
convert a less satisfactory present state into a more satisfactory future
state.
For contcmplative meditation time is merely duration, "la d u d e
pure, dont l'tcoulement est continu, et oh 1,011 passe, par gradations
insensibles, d'un Ctat i l'autrc: ContinuitC rkellement vkcue." The
"now" of the present is continualIy shifted to the past and is retained
in the memory only. Reflecting about the past, say the philosophers,
man becomes aware of t i n ~ e . ~
However, it is not recollection that
conveys to man the categories of change and of time, but the will
to improve the conditions of his life.
'Time as we measure it by various mechanical devices is always
past, and time as the philosophers use this concept is always either
past or future. The present is, from these aspects, nothing but an
ideal boundary line separating the past from the future. But from
the praxeological aspect there is between the past and the future a
cxten,je';
preseiic. Acdoii is .as
in rhe Tea: present becaiise
it utilizes the instant and thus embodies its real it^.^ Later retrospective
I. In a treatise on economics there is n o need to enter into a discussion of the
endeavors to construct mechanics as an axiomatic system in which the concept
of function is substituted for that of cause and effect. It will be shown later that
axiomatic mechanics cannot serve as a model for the treatment of the economic
system. Cf. below, pp. 351-354.
2. I-Ienri Bergson, Matidre et mimoire (7th ed. Paris, I ~ I I ) ,p. 205.
3. Edmund Husserl, "Vorlesungen zur Phanomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins," Jahrbucb fur Philosophie and Phiinomenologische Forschung,
IX ( 1 9 2 8 ) , 391 ff.; A. Schiitz, loc. cit., pp. 45 ff.
4. "Ce que j'appelle mon present, c'est mon attitude vis-his de l'avenir immidiat, c'est mon action imminente." Bergson, op. cit., p. 1 5 2 .

Time

rot

reflection discerns in the instant passed away first of all the action
and the conditions which it offered to action. That which can no
longer be done or consumed because the opportunity for it has
passed away, contrasts the past wi:h the present. That which cannot
yet be done or consumed, because the conditions for undertaking it
or the time for its ripening have not yet come, contrasts the future
with the past. The present offers to acting opportunities and tasks
for which it was hitherto too early and for which it will be hereafter
too late.
The present qua duration is the continuation of the conditions and
opportunities given for acting. Every kind of action requires special
conditions to which it must be adjusted with regard to the aims
sought. T h e concept of the present is therefore different for various
fields of action. It has no reference whatever to the various methods
of measuring the passing of time by spatial movements. The present
encloses as much of the time passed away as still is actual, i.e., of
importance for acting. The present contrasts itself, according to the
various actions one has in view, with the Middle Ages, with the nineteenth century, with the past year, month, or day, but no less with
the hour, minute, or second just passed away. If a man says: Nowadays Zeus is no longer worshiped, he has a present in mind other than
that the motorcar driver who thinks: Now it is still too early to
turn.
As the future is uncertain it always remains undecided and vague
how much of it we can consider as now and present. If a man had
said in I 91j : A t present-now-in
Europe freedom of thought is
undisputed, he would have not foreseen that this present would very
soon be a past.

3. The Economization of Time
Man is subject to the passing of time. He comes into existence,
grows, becomes old, and passes away. His time is scarce. He must
economize it as he does other scarce factors.
The economization of time has a peculiar character because of
the uniqueness and irreversibility of the temporal order. The importance of these facts manifests itself in every part of the theory of
action.
Only one fact must be stressed at this point. The economization of
time is independent of the economization of economic goods and services. Even in the land of Cockaigne man would be forced to economize
time, provided he were not immortal and not endowed with eternal

102

Human Action

youth and indestructible health and vigor. Although all his appetites
could be satisfied immediately without any expenditure of labor, he
would have to arrange his time schedule, as there are states of satisfaction which are incompatible and cannot be consummated at the
same time. For this man, too, time would be scarce and subject to the
aspect of sooner and later.

4. The Temporal Relation Between Actions
T w o actions of an individual are never synchronous; their temporal
relation is that of sooncr and later. Actions of various individuals can
be considered as synchronous only in the light of the physical ~nethods for the measurement of time. Synchronism is a praxeological
notion only wirh regard to the concerted efforts of various acting
men.s
A man's individual actions succeed one another. They can never be
effected at the same instant; they can only follow one another in
more or less rapid succession. There arc actions which serve several
purposes at one blow. It would be misleading to refer to them as a
coincidence of various actions.
People have oftcn failcd to recognize the meaning of the tern1
"scale of value" and have disregarded the obstacles preventing the
assun~ptionof synchronism in the various actions of an individual.
They have interpreted a man's various acts as the outcome of a scale
of value, independent of these acts and preceding them, and of a
previously devised plan whose realization they aim at. The scale of
value and the plan to which duration and in~mutabilityfor a certain
period of time wcre attributed, were hypostasized into the cause
and motive of the various individual actions. Synchronism which
could not be asserted with regard to various acts was then easily
discovered in the scale of value and in the plan. But this overlooks the
fact that the scale of value is nothing but a constructed tool of thought.
The scale of value manifests itself only in real acting; it can be discerned only from the observation of real acting. I t is therefore impermissible to contrast it with real acting and to use it as a yardstick
for the appraisal of real actions.
It is no less impermissible to differentiate between rational and
allegedly irrational acting on the basis of a comparison of real acting
with earlier drafts and plans for future actions. It may be very in5. In order to avoid any possible misunderstanding it may be expedient to
emphasize that this theorem has nothin at all to do with Einstein's theorem concerning the temporal relation of spatiaty distant events.

Time

103

teresting that yesterday goals were set for today's acting other than
those really aimed at today. But yesterday's pIans do not provide us
with any more objective and nonarbitrary standard for the appraisal
of today's real acting than any other ideas and norms.
T h c attempt has been made to attain the notion of a nonrational
action by this reasoning: If a is preferred to b and b to c, logically a
should be preferred to c. BLI~if actually c is preferred to a, we are
faced with a mode of acting to which we cannot ascribe consistency
and rational it^.^ This reasoning disregards the fact that two acts of
an individual can never be synchronous. If in one action a is prefcrred
to b and in another action b to c, it is, howevcr short the interval between the nvo actions may be, not permissible to construct a uniform
scale of value in which n precedcs h and b precedes c. N o r is it permissible to consider a later third action as coincident with the two
previous actions. A11 that the example proves is that vaIue judgments
are not immutable and that therefore a scale of value, which is abstracted from various, necessarily nonsynchronous actions of an individual, may bc self-c~ntradictory.~
Onc must not confuse the logical concept of consistency (viz., absence of contradiction) and the praxeological concept of consistency
(viz., constancy or clinging to the same principles). Logical consistency has its place only in thii-king, constancy has its place only
in acting.
Constancy and rationality are entirely different notions. If one's
valuations have changed, unremitting faithfulness to the once espoused
principles of action merely for the sake of constancy would not be
rational but simply stubborn. Only in one respect can acting be constant: in preferring the more valuablc to the less valuable. If the valuations changc, acting must change also. Faithfulness, under changed
conditions, to an old plan would be nonsensical. A logical system must
be consistent and free of contradictions because it impIies the coexistence of all its parts and theorems. In acting, which is necessarily
in the temporal order, there cannot be any question of such consistency. Acting must be suited to purpose, and purposefulness requires adjustment to changing conditions.
Presence of mind is considercd a virtue in acting man. A man has
presence of mind if he has the ability to think and to adjust his acting
so quickly that the interval between thc emergence of new conditions
6. Cf. Felix Kaufmann, "On the Subject-Matter of Economic Science," Economica, XIII, 390.
7. Cf. Ph. Wicksteed. The Commonsense o f Political Economy, ed. Robbins
(London, 1gj3), I, 32 ff.; L. Robbins, An Essay on the Nature and Significance
of Economic Science (zd ed. London, 19j5), pp. 91 ff.

104

Human Action

and the adaptation of his actions to them becomes as short as possible.
If constancy is viewed as faithfulness to a plan once designed without
regard to changes in conditions, then presence of mind and quick
reaction arc the very opposite of constancy.
When the speculator goes to the stock exchange, he may sketch a
definite plan for his operations. Whcther or not he clings to this plan,
his actions are rational also in the sense which those eager to distinguish rational acting from irrational attribute to the term "rational."
This speculator in the course of the day may embark upon transactions which an observer, not taking into account the changes occurring
in market conditions, wiil not bc able to interpret as the outcome of
constant behavior. But thc speculator is firm in his intention to make
profits and to avoid losses. Accordingly he must adjust his conduct
to the change in market conditions and in his own judgment concerning the future development of p r i c ~ s . ~
However one twists things, one will ncvcr succeed in formulating
the notion of "irrational" action whose "jrrationality" is not founded
upon an arbitrary judgment of value. Let us suppose that somebody
has chosen to act inconstantly for no other purpose than for the sake
of refuting the praxeological assertion that there is no irrational action.
What happens here is that a man aims at a peculiar goal, viz., the refutation of a praxeologicaI theorcm, and that he accordingly acts differently from what he would have done otherwise. H e has chosen an
unsuitable means for the refutation of praxeology, that is all.
8. Plans too, of course, may be self-contradictory. Sometimes their contradictions may be the effect of mistaken judgment. But sometimes such contradictions
may be intentional and serve a definite purpose. If, for instance, a publicized
program of a government or a political party promises high prices to the producers and at the same time low prices to the consumers, the purpose of such an
espousal of incom atible goals may be demagogic. Then the program, the publicized plan, is sel!contmadictory;
but the plan of its authors who wanted to attain a definite end through the endorsement of incompatible aims and their public announcement, is free of any contradiction.

VI. UNCERTAINTY
I.

Uncertainty and ..Acting

a E uncertainty of the future is already implied in the very notion

T

of action. That man acts and that the future is uncertain are
b y no means two independent matters. They are only two different
modes of establishing one thing.
W e may assume that the outcome of all events and changes is
uniquely determined by eternal unchangeable laws governing becoming and development in the whole universe. W e may consider the
necessary connection and interdependence of all phenomena, i.e.,
their causal concatenation, as the fundamental and ultimate fact. We
may entirely discard the notion of undetermined chance. But however that may be, or appear to the mind of a perfect intelligence, the
fact remains that to acting man the future is hidden. If man knew the
future, he would not have to choose and would not act. H e would
be like an automaton, reacting to stimuli without any will of his own.
Some philosophers are prepared to explode the notion of man's
will as an illusion and self-deception because man must un\vittingly
behave according to the inevitable laws of causality. They may be
right or wrong from the point of view of the prime mover or the
cause of itself. However, from the human point of view action is the
ultimate thing. W e do not assert that man is "free" in choosing and
acting. W e merely establish the fact that he chooses and acts and that
we are at a loss to use the methods of the natural sciences for answering the question why he acts this way and not otherwise.
hTatural science does not render the future predictable. It makes
it possible to foretell the results to be obtained by definite actions.
But it leaves impredictable two spheres: that of insufficiently known
natural phenomena and that of human acts of choice. Our ignorance
with regard to these two spheres taints all human actions with uncertainty. Apodictic certainty is only within the orbit of the deductive system of aprioristic theory. T h e most that can be attained with
regard to reality is probability.
I t is not the task of praxeology to investigate whether or not it is
permissible to consider as certain some of the theorems of the em-

Human Action

I 06

pirical natural scienccs. This problem is without practical importancc
for praxeological considerations. At any rate, the theorems of physics
and chemistry have such a high degree of probability that we are entitled to call them certain for all practical purposes. W e can practically
forecast the working of a machine constructed according to the rules
of scicntific technology. Rut the construction of a machine is only
a part in a broader program that aims at supplying the consumers
with the machine's products. Whether this was or was not the most
appropriate plan depends on the development of future conditions
which at the time of the plan's execution cannot be forecast with
certainty. Thus the degree of certainty with regard to the technologicaI outcome of the machine's construction, whatever it may be,
does not removc the uncertainty inherent in thc whole action. Future
needs and valuations, the reaction of men to changes in conditions,
future scientific and technological knowledge, future ideologies and
policies can ncver be foretold with more than a greater or smaller degree of probability. Every action refers to an unknown future. It is
in this sense always a risky speculation.
T h e problems of truth and certainty concern the general theory
of human knowledge. The problem of probability, on the other hand,
is a primary conccrn of praxeology.
2.

The ,Meaning of Probability

T h e treatment of probability has been confused by the mathematicians. From the beginning there was an ambiguity in dealing with the
calculus of probability. When the Chevalier de 3461-6consulted Pascal
on the problems involved in the games of dice, the great mathematician
should have frankly told his friend the truth, namely, that mathematics
cannot be of any use to the gambler in a game of pure chance. Instead he wrapped his answer in the symbolic language of mathematics.
What could easily be explained in a few sentcnccs of mundane speech
was expressed in a tcr&inology which is unfamiliar to the immense
majority and therefore regarded with reverential awe. People suspected that the puzzling formulas contain somc important revelations,
hidden to the uninitiated; they got the impression that a scicntific
method of gambling exists and that the esoteric teachings of mathematics provide a key for winning. T h e heavenly mystic Pascal unintentionally became the patron saint of gambling. The textbooks of
the calculus of probability gratuitously propagandize for the gambling casinos prccisely because they arc sealed books to the layman.
No less havoc was spread by the equivocations of the calculus of

Uncertainty

107

prohatditv in the field of scientific research. T h e history of every
l m n c h of Iinowlcdge records instances of the misapplication of the
cnlculus of probability ~vhich,as John Stuart Adill observed, made
ie "the real opprobri;m of mathematics." l Some of the worst errors have arisen in our day in the interpretation of the methods of
physics.
T h e problcm of probable infercncc is rriuch bigger than those
problcrns n hich constitute the field of the calculus of probability.
Only preoccupation kvith the mathematical treatment could result
in tl;e prejudice that probability always means frequency.
X further error confused the problem of probability with the
problem of inductive reasoning as applied by the natural sciences. T h e
attempt to substitute a universal theory of probability for the category
of causaIity characterizes an abortive mode of philosophizing, very
fashionablk only a few years ago.
A statemcnt is probable if our knowledge concerning its content
is deficient. W e do not know everything which would be required
for a definite decision between true and not true. But, on the other
hand, w e do know something about it; we are in a position to say
more than simply non Ziqzm o r ignoramz~s.
There are two entirely different instances of probability; we may
call them class prolnbility (or frequency probability) and case probabiIity (or the specific understanding of the sciences of human action).
T h e field for the application of the former is the field of thc natural
sciences, entirely ruled b y causality; the field for the application of
the latter is the field of the sciences of human action, entirely ruled by
tcleology.

3. Class ProbabiIity
Class probability means: W e know or assume to know, with regard
t o the problem concerned, everything about the behavior of a wholc
class of events o r phenomena; but about the actual singular events or
phenomena we know nothing but that they are elements of this class.
W c know, for instance, that there are ninety tickets in a lottery
and that five of them will be drau7n. Thus we know all about the behavior of the whole class of tickets. But with regard to the singular
tickets we do not know anything but that they are elements of this
class of tickets.
W e have a complcte table of n~ortalityfor a definite period of the
past in a definite area. If we assume that with regard to mortaIity no
I . John Stuart Mill, A System of Logic Rntiocinative and Inductive (new impression, London, 1936). p. 353.

Human Action
changes will occur, we may say that we know everything about the
mortality of the whole population in question. But with regard to the
life expectancy of the individuals we do not know anything but that
they are members of this class of people.
For this defective knowledge the calculus of probability provides
a presentation in symbols of the mathematical terminology. It neither
expands nor deepens nor complements our knowledge. It translates
it into mathematical language. Its calculations repeat in algebraic formulas what we knew beforehand. They do not lead to results that
would tell us anything about the actual singular events. And, of
course, they do not add anything to our Itnowledge concerning the
behavior of the whole class, as this knowledge was already perfector was considered perfect-at the very outset of our consideration
of the matter.
It is a serious mistake to believe that the calculus of probability
provides the gambler with any information which could remove or
lessen the risk of gambling. It is, contrary to popular fallacies, quite
useless for the gambler, as is any other mode of logical or mathematical
reasoning. I t is the characteristic mark of gambling that it deals with
the unknown, with pure chance. T h e gambler's hopes for success
are not based on substantial considerations. T h e nonsuperstitious
gambler thinks: "There is a slight chance [or, in other words: 'it is
not impossible'] that I may win; I am ready to put up the stake required. I know very well that in putting it up I am behaving like a
fool. But the biggest fools have the most luck. Anyway!"
Cool reasoning must show the gambler that he does not improve
his chances by buving two tickets instead of one of a lottery in which
the total amount-of the winnings is smaller than the proceeds from
the sale of all tickets. If he were to buy all the tickets, he would
certainly lose a part of his outlay. Yet every lottery customer is
firmly convinced that it is better to buy more tickets than less. T h e
Thev dc! not 5m" i '~ l ~
habinlks of the casinos and slot machines nevcr q .
a thought to the fact that, because the ruling odds favdr the banker
over the plaver, the outcome will the more certainly result in a loss
for them the'longer they continue to play. T h e lure of gambling consists precisely in its unpredictability and its adventurous vicissitudes.
Let us assume that ten tickets, each bearing the name of a different
man, are put into a box. One ticket will be drawn, and the man whose
name it bears will be liable to pay loo dollars. Then an insurer can
promise to the loser fulI indemnification if he is in a position to insure
each of the ten for a premium of ten dollars. H e will collect roo
dollars and will have to pay the same amount to one of the ten. But

Uncertainty

I09

if he were to insure one only of thcnl at a rate fixed by the calculus, he
would embark not upon an insurance business, but upon gambling.
He would substitute himself for the insured. He would collect ten
dollars and would get the chance either of kceping it or of losing that
ten dollars and ninety dollars more.
If a man promises to pay at the death of another man a definite
sum and charges for this promise the amount adequate to the life
expectancy as determined by the calculus of probability, he is not
an insurer but a gambler. Insurance, whether conducted according to
business principles or according to the principle of mutuality, requires the insurance of a whole class or what can reasonably be considered as such. Its basic idea is pooling and distribution of risks, not
the calculus of probability. The mathematical operations that it requires are the four elementary operations of arithmetic. The calculus
of probability is mere by-play.
This is clearly evidenced by the fact that the elimination of hazardous risk by pooling can also be effected without any recourse to
actuarial n~ethods.Everybody practices it in his daily life. Every businessman includes in his normal cost accounting the cornpensation for
losses which regularly occur in the conduct of affairs. "Regularly"
means in this context: The amount of these losses is Imown as far as
the whole class of the various items is concerned. T h e fruit dealer
may know, for instance, that one of every fifty apples will rot in this
stock; but he does not know to which individual apple this will happen. H e deals with such Iosses as with any other item in the bill of
costs.
The definition of the essence of class probability as given above
is the only logically satisfactory one. It avoids the crude circularity
implied in all definirions referring to the equiprobability of possible
events. In stating that we know nothing about actuaI singular events
except that they are elements of a class the behavior of which is fully
known, this vicious circle is disposed of. Moreaver, it is superfluous
to add a fiirtlier condition caiicd h e absence of any reguiarity in the
sequence of the singular events.
The characteristic mark of insurance is that it deals with the whole
class of events. As we pretend to know everything about the behavior of the whole class, there seems to be no specific risk involved
in the conduct of the business.
Seither is there any specific risk in the business of the keeper of a
gambling bank or in the enterprise of a lottery. From the point of
view of the lottery enterprise the outcome is predictable, provided
that all tickets have been sold. If some tickets remain unsold, the

I 10

Human Action

enterpriser is in the same position with regard to them as every buyer
of a ticket is with regard to the tickets he bought.

4. Case Probability
Case probability means: W e know, w-ith regard to a particular
event, some of the factors which determine its outcome; but there are
other determining factors about which we know nothing.
Case probability has nothing in common with class probability but
the incompleteness of our knowledge. In every other regard the two
are entirely different.
There are, of course, many instances in which men try to forecast
a particular future event on the basis of their knowledge about the
behavior of the class. A doctor may determine the chances for the
full recovery of his patient if he knows that 70 per cent of those
afflicted with the same disease recover. If he expresses his judgment
correctly, he will not say more than that the probability of recovery
is 0.7, that is, that out of ten patients not more than three on the
average die. All such predictions about external events, i.e., events
in the field of the natural sciences, are of this character. They are in
fact not forecasts about the issue of the case in question, but statements about the frequency of the various possible outcomes. They
are based either on statis&al information or simply on the rough
estimate of the frequency derived from nonstatis;ical experience.
So far as such types of probable statements are concerned, we are
not faced with case probability. In fact we do not ltnow anything
about the case in question except that it is an instance of a class the
behavior of which we ltnow or think w-e know.
A surgeon tells a patient who considers submitting himself to an
operation that thirty out of every hundred undergoing such an
operation die. If the patient asks whether this number of deaths is
already full, he has misunderstood the sense of the doctor's statement. He has fallen prey to the error known as the "gambler's fallacy." Like the roulette player who concludes from a run of ten red
in succession that the probability of the next turn being black is noxv
greater than it was before the run, he confuses case probability with
class probability.
All medical prognoses, when based only on physiological knowledge, deal with class probability. A doctor who hears that a man he
does not know has been seized by a definite illness will, on the basis
of his general medical experience, say: His chances for recovery are
7 to 3. If the doctor himself treats the patient, he may have a different

Uncertainty

111

opinion. The patient is a young, vigorous man; he was in good health
before he was taken with the illness. In such cases, the doctor may
think, the mortality figures are lower; the chances for this patient are
not 7: 3, but 9: r . The logical approach remains the same, although it
may be based not on a collection of statistical data, but simply on a
more or less exact rtsumC of the doctor's own experience with previous cases. What the doctor knows is akways only the behavior of
classes. In our instance the class is the class of young, vigorous men
seized by the illness in question.
Case roba ability is a particular feature of our dealing with problems of human action. Here any reference to frequency is inappropriate, as our statcments always deal with unique events which as such
-i.e., with regard to the problem in question-are not members of
any class. W e can form a class "American presidential elections."
This class concept may prove useful or even necessary for various
kinds of reasoning, as, for instance, for a treatment of the matter from
the viewpoint of constitutional law. But if we are dealing with the
election of 1944-either, before the election, with its future outcome or, after the election, with an analysis of the factors which
determined the outcome-we are grappling with an individual,
unique, and nonrepeatable case. The case is characterized by its unique
merits, it is a class bv itself. All the marks which make it permissible to
subsume it under any class are irrelevant for the problem in question.
Two football teams, the Blues and the Yellows, will play tomorrow.
In the past the Blues have always defeated the Yellows. This knowledge is not knowledge about a class of events. If we were to consider
it as such, we would have to conclude that the BIues are always
victorious and that the Yellows are always defeated. W e wouId not
be uncertain with regard to the outcome of the game. W e would
know for certain that the Blues will win again. The mere fact that
we consider our forecast about tomorrow's game as only probabIe
shows that we do not argue this way.
On the other hand, we believe that the fact that the Blues were
victorious in the past is not immaterial with regard to the outcome
of tomorrow's game. W e consider it as a favorable prognosis for the
repeated success of the Blues. If we were to argue correctly according to the reasoning appropriate to class probability, we would not
attach any importance to this fact. If we were not to resist the
erroneous conclusion of the "gambler's fallacy," we would, on the
contrary, argue that tomorrow's game will result in the success of
the Ycllows.
If we risk some money on the chance of one team's victory, the

112

Human Action

lawyers would qualify our action as a bet. They would call it gambling if class probability were involved.
Everything that outside the field of class probability is commonly
irnplied in the tern1 probability refers to the peculiar mode of reasoning involved in dealing with historical uniqueness or individuality,
the specific understanding of the historical sciences.
Understanding is always based on incomplete Imowledge. \t7e may
know the motives of the acting men, the ends they are aiming at, and
the means they plan to apply for the attainment of these ends. W e
have a definite opinion with regard to the effects to be expected from
the operation of these factors. But this knowledge is defective. W e
cannot exclude beforehand the possibility that we have erred in the
appraisal of their influence or have failed to take into considcration
some factors whose interference we did lot foresee at all, or not in a
correct way.
Gambling, engineering, and speculating are three different modes
of dealing with the future.
T h e gambler knows nothing ahout the cvcnt on which the outcome of his gambling depends. All that he knows is the frequency of
a favorable outcome of a scries of such events, linoudedge which is
useless for his undertaking. H e trusts to good luck, that is his only
plan.
Life itself is exposed to many risks. A t any moment it is endangered
by disastrous accidents which cannot be controlled, or at least not
sufficiently. Every man banks on good luck. H e counts upon not
being struck by li&tning and not being bitten by a viper. There is an
elcmcnt of gambling in human life. Alan can remove some of the
chrematistic conseqi~enccsof such disasters and accidents by taking
out insurance policies. In doing so he banks upon the opposite chances.
On the part of the insured the insurance is gambling. His premiums
were spent in vain if the disaster does not occur." With regard to
noncontrollable natural events man is always in the position of a

---Ll,...

g'lIlIUIcI.

T h e engineer, on the other hand, knows everything that is needed
for a technologically satisfactory solution of his problem, the construction of a machine. As far as some fringes of uncertainty are left
in his power to control, he tries to eliminate thern by taking safety
margins. T h e engineer knows only soluble problems and problems
which cannot be solved under the present state of knowledge. H e
2. In life insurance the insured's stake spent in vain consists only in the difference between the amount collected and the amount he could h a w accumulated
by saving.

Uncertainty

"3

may sometimes discover from adverse experience that his lmowledgc
was less complete than he had assumed and that he failed to recognize
the indeterminateness of some issues which he thought he was able
to control. Then he will try to render his knowledge more complete.
Of course he can never eliminate altogether the element of gambling
present in human life. But it is his principle to operate only within
an orbit of certainty. H e aims at full control of the elements of his
action.
It is customary nowadays to speak of "social engineering." Like
planning, this term is a synonym for dictatorship and totalitarian
vrannv. The idea is to treat human beings in the same way in which
the eniinecr treats the stuff out of which he builds his bridges, roads,
and machines. The social engineer's will is to be substituted for the
will of the various people he plans to use for the construction of his
utopia. Mankind is to be divided into two classes: the almighty
dictator, on the one hand, and the underlings who are to be reduced
to the status of mere pawns in his plans and cogs in his machinery,
on the other. If this were feasible, then of course the social engineer
would not have to bother about understanding other people's actions.
He would be free to deal with them as technology deals with lumber
and iron.
In the real world acting man is faced with the fact that there are
feIlow men acting on their own behalf as he himself acts. The nccessity to adjust his actions to other people's actions makes him a speculator for whom success and failure depend on his greater or lesser
ability to understand the future. Every investment is a form of
speculation. There is in the course of human events no stability and
consequently no safety.
j.

Nunlerical EvaIuation of Case Probability

Case probability is not open to any kind of numerical evaluation.
What is comrnonly considered as such exhibits, when more closely
scrutinized, a different character.
On the cve of the 1944 presidential election peopIe could have
said:
(a) I an1 ready to bet three dollars against one that Roosevelt will
be elected.
(b) I guess that out of the total amount of electors 4 j millions will
exercise their franchise, 2 5 millions of whom will vote for Roosevelt.
(c) I estimate Roosevelt's chances as 9 to I .
(d) I am certain that Roosevelt will be elected.

1 14

Human Action

Statement (d) is obviously inexact. If asked under oath on the witness stand whcther he is as certain about Roosevelt's future victory
as about the fact that a block of ice will melt when exposed to a
tempcrature of I jo degrees, our man would have answered no. H e
would have rcctified his statement and would have declared: I am
personaliy fully convinced that Roosevelt will carry on. That is m y
opinion. But, of course, this is not certainty, only the way I understand the conditions involved.
T h e case of statement (a) is simiIar. This man believed that he risked
very littlc when laying such a wager. T h e relation 3: I docs not
assert anything a t ~ o u the chances of the candidates. It is the outcome of the interplay of two factors: the opinion that Rooscvelt
will be elected and the man's propensity for betting.
Statement (b) is an evaluation of the outcome of the impending
event. Its figures refer not t o a greater or smaller degree of probability,
but t o the expectcd rcsult of the voting. Such a statcment may be
based on a systematic investigation like the Gallup poll or simp& on
estimates.
It is different with statement (c). This is a proposition about the
expected outcome couched in arithmetical terms. It certainly docs
not mean that out of ten cases of the same type nine are favorable for
Roosevelt and one unfavorable. I t cannot have any refercnce t o class
probability. But what else can it mean?
It is a metaphorical expression. Most of the metaphors used in daily
speech imaginatively identify an abstract object with another object
that can be apprehended directly by the senses. Yet this is not a ncccssary feature of metaphorical language, but merely a consequence o f
the fact that the concrete is as a rule more familiar t o us than the
abstract. As metaphors aim at an explanation of something which is
less we11 known by comparing it with something better known, they
consist for the most part in identifying something abstract with a
better-known concrete. T h e specific mark of our case is that it is an
attempt to chcidate a compfcated state of aeairs b y rcsorcing co an
analogy borrowed from a branch of higher mathematics, thc calcuIus
of probability. As i t happens, this mathematical discipline is more
popular than the analysis of the epistcmological nature of understanding.
Thcre is no use in applying the yardstick of logic to a critique of
n~etaphoricallanguage. Analogies and metaphors are always defective and logically unsatisfactory. It is usual to search for the underlying tertium co7nparationis. But even this is not permissible with
regard t o the metaphor we are dealing with. For the comparison is

Uncertainty

115

based on a conception which is in itself faulty in the very frame of
the calculus of probability, namely the gambler's fallacy. In asserting
that Roosevelt's chances are 9: I , the idea is that Roosevelt is in regard
t o the impending election in the position of a man who owns go per
cent of all tickets of a lottery in regard to the first prize. I t is implied
that this ratio 9: I tells us something substantial about the outcome of
the unique case in which we are interested. There is no need t o repeat th; this is a mistaken idea.
No less impermissible is the recourse to thc calculus of probability
in dealing with hypotheses in the field of the natural sciences. Hypothescs are tentative explanations consciously based on logically insufficient argurncnts. With regard to them all that can be asserted is:
T h e hypothesis does or does not contradict either logical principles
or the facts as experimentally established and considered as true. In
the first case it is untenable, in the second case it is-under the present
state of our experimental knowledge-not untenable. (The intensity
of personal conviction is purely subjective.) Neither frequency probability nor historical understanding enters into the matter.
T h e term hypothesis, applied to definite modes of understanding
historical events, is a misnomer. If a historian asserts that in the fall
of the Romanoff dynasty the fact that this house was of German
background played a relevant role, he does not advance a hypothesis.
T h e facts on which his understanding is founded are beyond question. There was a widespread anin~osityagainst Germans in Russia
and the ruling line of the Romanoffs, having for 2 0 0 years intermarried
exclusivcIy with scions of families of German descent, was vicwed
b y many Russians as a germanized family, even b y those who assumed that Tsar Paul was not the son of Peter 111. But the question
rcrnains what the relevance of these facts was in the chain of events
which brought about the dethronement of this dynasty. Such problems are not open to any elucidation other than that provided by understanding.

6. Betting, Gambling, and Playing Games

A bet is the engagement t o risk money or other things against another man on the result of an event aboct the outcome of which we
know only so much as can be known on the ground of understanding.
Thus people may bet on the result of an impending election or a tennis
match. O r they may bet on whose opinion concerning the content
of a factual assertion is right and whose is wrong.
Gambling is the engagement to risk money or other things against

I 16

H7471zlzn Action

another man on the result of an event about which we do not know
anything more than is known on the ground of knowledge concerning the behavior of the whole class.
Sometimes betting and gambling are combined. The outcome of
horse racing depends both on human action-on the part of the
owner of the horse, the trainer, and thc jockey-and on nonhuman
factors-the qualities of the horse. Most of those risking money on
the turf are simply gamblers. But the experts believe they know something by understanding the people involved; as far as this factor
influences their decision they are betters. Furthermore they pretend to know the horses; they make a prognosis on the grobnd of
their ltnowledge about the behavior of the classes of horses to which
they assign the various competing horses. So far they are gamblers.
Later chapters of this book deal with the methods business applies
in handling the problem of the uncertainty of the future. On this
point of our reasoning only one more observation must be made.
Embarking upon p m e s can be either an end or a means. It is an
end for people who yearn for the stimulation and excitement with
which the vicissitudes of a game provide them, or whose vanity is
flattered by the display of their skill and superiority in playing a
game which requires cunning and expertness. It is a means for professionals who want to make money by winning.
Playing a game can therefore be called an action. But it is not permissible to reverse this statement and to call every action a game or
to deal with all actions as if they were games. The immediate aim in
playing a game is to defeat the partner according to the rules of the
game. This is a peculiar and special case of acting. Most actions do not
aim a t anybody's defeat or loss. They aim at an improvement in conditions. It can happen that this improvement is attained at some other
men's expense. But this is certainly not always the case. It is, to put
it mildly, certainly not the case within the regular operation of a
social system based on the division of labor.
There Is n ~ t
the slightest ma!ogy hctween playing games and the
conduct of business within a market society. The card player wins
money by outsmarting his antagonist. The businessman makes money
by supplying customers with goods they want to acquire. There may
exist an analogy between the strategy of a card player and that of a
bluffer. There is no need to investigate this problem. He who interprets the conduct of business as trickery is on the wrong path.
T h e characteristic feature of games is the antagonism of two or more
players or groups of p l a y ~ r s . ~
The characteristic feature of business
3. "Patience" or "Solitaire" is not a one-person game, but a pastime, a means

Uncertainty

"7

within a society, i.c., within an order based on the division of labor, is
concord in the endeavors of its members. As soon as they begin to
antagonize one another, a tendency toward social disintegration
emerges.
Within the frame of a market economy competition does not involve antagonism in the sense in which this term is applied to the
hostile clash of incompatible interests. Competition, it is true, may
sometimes or even very often evoke in the cornpctitors those passions
of hatred and malice which usually accompany the intention of inflicting evil on other people. Psychologists are therefore prone to
confuse combat and competition. But praxeology must beware of
such artificial and misleading equivocations. From its point of view
there exists a fundamental difference between catallactic competition
and combat. Competitors aim at excellence and preeminence in accomplishments within a system of mutual cooperation. The function
of competition is to assign to every member of a social system that
position in which he can best serve the whole of society and all its
members. It is a method of selecting the most able man for each
performance. Where there is social cooperation, there some variety
of selection must be applied. Only where the assignment of various
individuals to various tasks is effected by the dictator's decisions
alone and the individuals concerned do not aid the dictator by endeavors to represent their own virtues and abilities in the most favorable light, is there no competition.
W e will have to deal at a later stage of our investigations with
the function of c ~ m p e t i t i o n .At
~ this point we must only emphasize
that it is misleading to apply the terminology of mutual extermination to the problems of mutual cooperation as it works within a society. Military terms are inappropriate for the dcscription of business operations. It is, e.g., a bad metaphor to spcak of the conquest
of a market. There is no conquest in the fact that one firm offers bettcr
or cheaper products than its competitors. There is strategy in business only in a metaphorical sense.

7. PraxeologicaI Prediction
Praxeological knowledge makes it possible to predict with apodictic
certainty the outcome of various modes of action. But, of course,
-.

of escaping boredom. It: certainly does not represent a pattern for what is goin:,
on in a communistic society, as John von Neumann and Oscar Morgensterr
(Theory of Games and Economic Behavior [Princeton, 19441, p. 86) assert.
4. See below, pp. 273-277.

I 18

Human Action

such prediction can never imply anything regarding quantitative
matters. Quantitative problems are in the field of human action open
to no other elucidation than that by understanding.
We can predict, as will be shown later, that-other things being
equal-a fall in the demand for n will result in a drop in the price of
n. But we cannot predict the extent of this drop. This question can
be answered only by understanding.
T h e fundamental deficiency implied in every quantitative approach to economic problems consists in the neglect of the fact that
there are no constant relations between what are called economic
dimensions. There is neither constancy nor continuity in the valuations and in the formation of exchange ratios between various commodities. Every new datum brings about a reshufling of the whole
price structure. Understanding, by trying to grasp what is going on
in the minds of the men concerned, can approach the problem of
forecasting future conditions. W e may call its method unsatisfactory
and the positivists may arrogantly scorn it. But such arbitrary judgments must not and cannot obscure the fact that understanding is the
only appropriate method of dealing with the uncertainty of future
conditions.

VII. ACTION WITHIN THE WORLD
I.

T h e L a w of Marginal Utility

sorts and grades; originally it knows only ordinal numbers,
A not cardinal
numbers. But the external world to which acting
CTION

man must adjust his conduct is a world of quantitative determinateness. In this world there exist quantitative relations between cause and
effect. If it were otherwise, if definite things could render unlimited
services, such things would never be scarce and could not be dealt
with as means.
Acting man vaIues things as means for the removal of his uneasiness. From the point of view of the natural sciences the various events
which result in satisfying human needs appear as very different. Acting man sees in these events only a more or a less of the same kind. In
valuing very different states of satisfaction and the means for their
attainment, man arranges all things in one scale and sees in them only
their reIevance for an increase in his own satisfaction. The satisfaction derived from food and that derived from the enjoyment of
a work of art are, in acting man's judgment, a more urgent or a less
urgent need; valuation and action place them in one scale of what is
more intensively desired and what is less. For acting man there exists
primarily nothing but various degrees of relevance and urgency with
regard to his own well-being.
Quantity and quality are categories of the external world. Only
indirectly do they acquire importance and meaning for action. ~ d cause every thing can only produce a limited effect, some things are
considered scarce and treated as means. Because the cfTecrs which
things are able to produce are different, acting man distinguishes
various classes of things. Because means of the same quantity and
quality are apt always to produce the same quantity of an effect of
the same quality, action does not differentiate between concrete definite quantities of homogeneous means. But this docs not imply that
it attaches the same value to the various portions of a supply of
homogeneous means. Each portion is valued separately. T o each
portion its own rank in the scale of value is assigned. But these orders
of rank can be ad libitum interchanged among the various portions of
the same magnitude.

IZO

Hzlman Action

If acting man has to decide between two or more means of different
classes, he grades the individual portions of each of them. H e assigns
to each portion its special rank. In doing so he need not assign to the
various portions of the same means orders of rank which immediately
succeed one another.
T h e assignment of orders of rank through the valuation is done
only in acting and through acting. H o w great the portions are to
which a single order of rank is assigned depends on the individual and
unique conditions under which man acts in every case. Action does
not deal with physical or metaphysical units which it values in an
abstract academic way; it is aIways faced with alternatives between
which it chooses. T h e choice must always be made between definite
quantities of means. I t is permissible to call the smallest quantity
which can be the object of such a decision a unit. But one must guard
oneself against the error of assuming that the valuation of the sum of
such units is derived from the valuation of the units, or that it represents the sum of the valuations attached to these units.
A man owns five units of commodity a and three units of cornmodity b. H e attaches to the units of a the rank-orders I , 2 , 4, 7, and 8, to
the units of b the rank-orders 3, 5, and 6. This means: If he must
choose between two units of a and two units of b, he will prefer to Iose
two units of a rather than two units of b. But if he must choose between three units of a and two units of b, he will prefer to lose two
units of b rather than three units of a. What counts always and alone
in valuing a compound of several units is the utility of this co~npound
as a whole-i.e., the increment in well-being dependent upon it or,
what is the same, the impairment of well-being which its loss must
bring about. There are no arithmeticaI processes involved, neither
adding nor multiplying; there is a valuation of the utility dependent
upon the having of the portion, compound, or supply in question.
Utility means in this context simpIy: causal relevance for the removal of feIt uneasiness. Acting man believes that the services a
thing can render are apt to improve his own well-being, and calls
this the utility of the thing concerned. For praxeology the term utility
is tantamount to importance attached to a thing on account of the
belief that it can remove uneasiness. T h e praxeological notion of utility
(subjective use-value in the terminology of the earlier Austrian economists) must be sharply distinguished from the technological notion
of utility (objective use-value in the terminology of the same economists). Use-value in the objective sense is the relation between a
thing and the effect it has the capacity to bring about. It is to objective use-value that people refer in employing such terms as the "heat-

Action Within the World

121

ing value" or "heating power" of coal. Subjective use-value is not
always based on true objective use-value. There are things to which
subjective use-value is attached because people erroneously believe
that they have the power to bring about a desired effect. On the other
hand there are things able to produce a desired effect to which no
use-value is attached because people are ignorant of this fact.
Let us look at the state of economic thought which prevailed on
the eve of the elaboration of the modern theory of value by Carl
Menger, William Stanley Jevons, and Lkon Walras. Whoever wants
to construct an elementary theory of value and prices must first
think of utility. Nothing indeed is more plausible than to assume that
things are valued according to their utility. But then a difficulty appears which presented to the older economists a problem they failed
to solve. They observed that things whose "utility" is greater are
valued less than other things of smaller utility. Iron is less appreciated
than gold. This fact seems to be incompatible with a theory of value
and prices based on the concepts of utility and use-value. The economists believed that they had to abandon such a theory and tried to
explain the phenomena of value and market exchange by other
theories.
Only late did the economists discover that the apparent paradox
was the outcome of a vicious formulation of the problem involved.
The valuations and choices that result in the exchange ratios of the
market do not decide between gold and iron. Acting man is not in a
position in which he must choose between all the gold and all the
iron. H e chooses at a definite time and place under definite conditions
between a strictly limited quantity of gold and a strictly limited
quantity of iron. His decision in choosing between IOO ounces of
gold and IOO tons of iron does not depend at all on the decision he
would make if he were in the highly improbable situation of choosing
between all the gold and all the iron. What counts alone for his actual
choice is whether under existing conditions he considers the direct or
:-2:---..

--&:"I?--&:--

I I I u l I c L L bdLL>ldCLIUII

---L:-L
WLIlCII

- -- UUIILG> UI
,.I?
--I2 ---12
L:-5 U I U CULLIU 5 I V C 111111 a>

IUU

-----A-

greater or smaller than the direct or indirect satisfaction he could derive from IOO tons of iron. H e does not express an academic or
philosophical judgment concerning the "absolute" value of gold and
of iron; he does not determine whether gold or iron is more important for mankind; he does not perorate as an author of books on the
philosophy of history or on ethical principles. H e simply chooses between two satisfactions both of which he cannot have together.
T o prefer and to set aside and the choices and decisions in which
they result are not acts of measurement. Action does not measure

122

Human Action

utility or valuc; it chooses between alternatives. There is no abstract
problem of total utility or total va1ue.l There is no ratiocinative operation which could lead from the valuation of a definite quantity or
number of things to the determination of the value of a greater or
smaller quantity or number. There is no means of calculating the
totaI value of a supply if only the values of its parts arc known. There
is no means of establishing the value of a part of a supply if only the
value of the total supply is known. There are in the sphere of values
and valuations no arithmetical operations; there is no such thing as
a calculation of values. The valuation of the total stock of two things
can differ from the valuation of parts of these stocks. An isolated
man owning seven cows and seven horses may value one horse higher
than one cow and may, when faced with the alternativc, prefer to
give up one cow rather than one horse. But at the same time the
same man, when faced with the alternative of choosing between his
whole supply of horses and his whole supply of cows, may prefer
to keep the cows and to give up the horses. The concepts of total
utility and total value are meaningless if not applied to a situation in
which people must choose between total supplies. The question
whether gold as such and iron as such is more useful and valuable
is reasonable only with regard to a situation in which mankind or an
isolated part of mankind must choose between all the -gold and all the
iron avaiiable.
T h e judgment of value refers always only to the supply with which
the concrete act of ch0ice.i~concerned. A supply is ex definitione
always composed of homogeneous parts each of which is capable of
rendering the same services as, and of being substituted for, any other
part. It is therefore immaterial for the act of choosing which particular part forms its object. All parts-units-of
the available stock
are considered as equally useful and valuable if the problem of giving
up one of them is raised. If the supply decreased by the loss of one
unit, actine man must decide anew how to use the various units of
F'
the rcmainlng stock. It is obvious that the srnallcr stock cannot render
all the services the greater stock could. That employment of the
various units which under this new disposition is no longer provided
for, was in the eyes of acting man the least urgent empIoyment among
all those for which he had previously assigned the various units of
the greater stock. The satisfaction which he derived from the use of
one unit for this employment was the smallest among the satisfactions
r. It is important to note that this chapter does not deal with prices or market
vaIues, but with subjectivc use-vaIue. Prices are a derivative of subjective usevalue. Cf. below, Chapter XVI.

Action Within the World

123

which the units of the greater stock had rendered to him. It is only
the value of this marginal satisfaction on which he must decide if the
question of renouncing one unit of the total stock comes up. When
faced with the problem of the value to be attached to one unit of a
homogeneous supply, man decides on the basis of the value of the
least important use he nlakes of the units of the whole supply; he
decides on the basis of marginal utility.
If a man is faced with the alternative of giving up either one unit
of his supply of a or one unit of his supply of b, he does not compare
the total value of his total stock of a with the total value of his stock
of b. He compares the marginal values both of a and of b. Although
he may value the total supply of a higher than the total supply of
b, the marginal value of b may be higher than the marginal value of a.
The same reasoning holds good for the question of increasing the
available supply of any commodity by the acquisition of an additional
definite number of units.
For the description of these facts economics does not need to employ the terminology of psychology. Neither does it need to resort
to psychological reasoning and arguments for proving them. If we
say that the acts of choice do not depend on the value attached to a
whole class of wants, but on that attached to the concrete wants in
question irrespective of the class in which thcy may be reckoncd, we
do not add anything to our knowledge and do not trace it back to
some better-known or more general knowledge. This mode of speaking in terms of classes of wants becomes intelligible only if we rernem.
ber the role played in the history of economic thought by the alleged
paradox of value. Carl Menger and B6hm-Bawerk had to make use
of the term "class of wants7' in order to refute the objections raised
by those who considered bread as such more valuabk than silk because the class "want of nourishment7' is more important than the
class "want of luxurious clothing." T o d a y the concept "class of
wants" is entirely superfluous. I t has no meaning for action and therefore none for the theory of value; it is, moreover, liable to bring
about error and confusion. Construction of concepts and classification are mental tools; they acquire meaning and sense only in the context of the theories which utilize them? I t is nonsensical to arrange
2 . Cf. Carl Menger, Grundsir'tze der Volkswirtrchaftslehre (Vienna, 1 8 7 1 ) ~
pp. 88 ff.; Bohm-Bawerk, Kapital und Kapitalzins (3d ed. Innsbruck, 1909), Pt. 11,
P.P. 237 ff.
3. Classes are not in the world. It is our mind that classifies the phenomena
in order to organize our knowledge. The question of whether a certain mode
of classifying phenomena is conducive to this end or not is different from the
question of whether it is logically permissible or not.

124

Hmnan Action

various wants into "classes of wants" in order to establish that such
a classification is of no avail whatever for the theory of value.
The law of marginal utility and decreasing marginal value is independent of Gossen's law of the saturation of wants (first law of
Gossen). In treating marginal utility we deal neither with sensuous
enjoyment nor with saturation and satiety. W e do not transcend the
sphere of praxeological reasoning in establishing the following definition: W e call that employment of a unit of a homogeneous supply
which a man makes if his supply is n units, but would not make if,
other things being equal, his supply were only n - I units, the
least urgent employment or the marginal employment, and the
utility derived from-it marginal utility. In order to attain this knowledge we do not need any physiological or psychological experience,
knowledge, or reasoning. It follows necessarily from our assumptions that people act (choose) and that in the first case acting man has
n units of a homogeneous supply and in the second case n - I units.
Under these conditions no other result is thinkable. Our statement is
formal and aprioristic and does not depend on any experience.
There are only two alternatives. Either there are or there are not
intermediate stages between the felt uneasiness which impels a man
to act and the state in which there can no longer be any action (be it
because the state of perfect satisfaction is reached or because man
is incapable of any further improvement in his conditions). In the
second case there 'could be only one action; as soon as this action is
consummated, a state would be reached in which no further action is
possible. This is manifestly incompatible with our assumption that
there is action; this case no longer implies the general conditions presupposed in the category of action. Only the first case remains. But
then there are various degrees in the asymptotic approach to the
state in which there can no longer be any action. Thus the law of
marginal utility is already implied in the category of action. It is
nothing else than the rcverse of the statement that what satisfies more
is
to what gives smaller satisfaction. If the supply available
increases from 72 - I units to n units, the increment can be employed
only for the removal of a want which is less urgent or less painful
than the least urgent or least painful among all those wants which
could be removed by means of the supply rz - I.
The law of marginal utility does not refer to objective use-value,
but to subjective use-value. It does not deal with the physical or
chemical capacity of things to bring about a definite effect in general,
but with their relevance for the well-being of a man as he himself
sees it under the prevailing momentary state of his affairs. I t does not

Action Within the W o r l d

125

deal primarily with the value of things, but with the value of the
services a man expects to get from them.
If we were to beIieve that marginal utility is about things and
their objective use-value, we would be forced to assume that marginal
utility can as well increase as decrease with an increase in the quantity of units available. It can happen that the employment of a certain
minimum quantity-rz units-of a good a can provide a satisfaction
which is deemed more valuable than the services expected from one
unit of a good b. Rut if the supply of a available is smaller than n, a
can only be employed for another service which is considered less
valuable than that of b. Then an increase in the quantity of a from
n - I units to n units results in an increase of the value attached to
one unit of n. T h e owner of loo logs may build a cabin which protects him against rain better than a raincoat. But if fewer than 30 logs
are available, he can only use them for a berth that protects him against
the dampness of the soi1. As the owner of 95 logs he would be prepared
to forsake the raincoat in order to get 5 logs more. As the owner of
10 logs he would not abandon the raincoat even for 10 logs. A man
whose savings amount to 3x00 may not be willing to carry out some
work for a remuneration of $200. But if his savings were $2,000 and
he were extremely anxious to acquire an indivisible good which cannot be bought for less than $z,ioo, he would be ready to perform
this work for $100. All this is in perfect agreement with the rightly
formulated law of marginal utility according to which value depends
on the utility of the services expected. There is no question of any
such thing as a law of increasing utility.
The law of marginal utility must be confused neither with Bernoulli's doctrine de mensura sortis nor with the Weber-Fechner law.
A t the bottom of Bernoulli's contribution were the generally known
and never disputed facts that people are eager to satisfy the marc
urgent wants before they satisfy the less urgent, and that a rich man
is in a position to provide better for his wants than a poor man. But
the inferences Bernoulli drew from these truisms are all wrong. H e
developed a mathematical theory that the increment in gratification
diminishes with the increase in a man's total wealth. His statement that
as a ruIe it is highly probable that for a man whose income is 5,000
ducats one ducat means not more than half a ducat for a man with
an income of 2,500 ducats is merely fanciful. Let us set aside the objection that there is no incans of drawing comparisons other than entirely arbitrary ones between the valuations of various people. Bernouili's method is no less inadequate for the valuations of the same
individual with various amounts of income. He did not see that all

that can be said about the case in question is that with increasing income every new increment is used for the satisfaction of a want less
urgently felt than the least urgently felt want already satisfied before
this increment took place. H e did not see that in valuing, choosing,
and acting there is no measurement and no establishment of equivalence, but grading, i.e., preferring and putting aside.4 Thus neither
Bernoulli nor the mathematicians and economists who adopted his
mode of reasoning could succeed in solving the paradox of value.
T h e mistakes inherent in the confusion of the Wcber-Fechner law
of psychophysics and the subjective theory of value have already been
attacked b y Max WTeber.Max Weber, it is true, was not sufficiently
familiar with economics and was too much under the sway of historicism to get a correct insight into the fundarncntals of economic
thought. But ingenious intuition provided him with a suggestion of
a way toward the correct solution. T h e theory of marginal utility,
he asserts, is "not psychologically substantiated, but rather-if an
cpisternological term is to be applied-pragmatically, i.e., on the
employment of the categories: ends and means."
If a man wants to remove a pathological condition by taking a definite quantity of a remedy, the intake of a multiple will not bring
about a better effect. T h e surplus will have either no effect other than
the appropriate dose, the optimum, or it will have detrimental effects.
T h e same is true of all kinds of satisfactions, although the optimum
is often reached onIy by the application of a large dose, and the point
at which further increments produce detrimental effects is often far
away. This is so because our world is a world of causality and of
quantitative relations between cause and effect. I l e who wants to
remove thc uneasiness caused b y living in a room with a temperature
of 35 degrees will aim at heating the room to a temperature of 65 or
70 degrees. I t has nothing to d o with the Weber-Fechner law that he
does not aim at a temperature of 180 or 300 degrees. Neither has it
anything to do with psychology. A11 that psychology can do for the
----I
:-- -f-L:- f
cxpalrauull
U L L U L ~ 14C.L is to establish 2s aii u!-ace
given that man
as a rule prefers the preservation of life and health to death and sickness. What counts for praxeology is only the fact that acting man
chooses between alternatives. That man is placed at crossroads, that

.,-...

*

4. Cf. Daniel Bernoulli, Versuch einer neuen Theorie zur Restimmulzg von
Glikcksflillen, trans. b y Pringsheim (Leipzig, r 896), pp. 27 ff.
5. Cf. Max Weber, Gesanmelte Aufsatze zur Wissenschaftslehre (Tiibingen,
1922), p. 3 7 2 ; also p. 149. T h e term "pragmatical" as used by Weber is of course
liable to bring about confusion. It is inexpedient to employ it for anything
other than the philosophy of Pragmatism. If Weber had known the term
"praxeology," he probably would have preferred it.

Action Within the World

127

he must and does choose, is-apart from other conditions-due to the
fact that he lives in a quantitative world and not in a world without
quantity, which is even unimaginable for the human mind.
The confusion of marginal utility and the Weber-Fechner law
originated from the mistake of looking only at the means for the
attainment of satisfaction and not at the satisfaction itself. If the
satisfaction had been thought of, the absurd idea would not have been
adopted of explaining the configuration of the desire for warmth by
referring to the decreasing intensity of the sensation of successive
increments in the intensity of the stimuli. That the average man does
not want to raise the temperature of his bedroom to 1 2 0 degrees has
no refercnce whatever to the intensity of the sensation for warmth.
That a man does not heat his room to the same degree as other normal
people do and as he himself would probably do, if he were not more
intent upon buying a new suit o r attending the performance of a
Beethoven symphony, cannot be explained by the methods of the
natural sciences. Objective and open to a treatment b y the methods
of the natural sciences are only the problems of objective use-value;
the valuation of objective use-value on the part of acting man is another thing.
2.

The Law of Returns

Quantitative definiteness in the effects brought about b y an economic good means with regard to the goods of the first order (consumers' goods): a quantity a of cause brings about-either in a definite period of time or at all-a quantity a of effect. With regard to the
goods of the higher orders (producers' goods) it means: a quantity b
of cause brings about a quantity /3 of effect, provided the complementary cause c contributes the quantity y of effect; only the concerted effects /3 and y bring about the quantity p of the good of the
first order D.There are in this case three quantities: b and c of the
two compIementary goods B and C, and p of the product D.
Wich b remaining unchanged, we call that value of c which results

P
in the highest value of --the
optimum. If several values of c result in
C

this highest vaIue of P
-, then we call that the optimum which results
C

also in the highest value of p. If the two complementary goods are
employed in the optimal ratio, they both render the highest output;
their power to produce, their objective use-value, is fully utilized;
no fraction of them is wasted. If we deviate from this optimal com-

I 28

Human Action

bination by increasing the quantity of C without changing the quantity of B, the return will as a rule increase further, but not in proportion to the increase in the quantity of C . If it is at all possible to
increase the return from p to pl by increasing the quantity of one
of the complementary factors only, namely b y substituting cx for
c, x being greater than I , we have at any rate: pl p and p,c
PCX.
For if it were possible to compensate any decrease in b by a corresponding increase in c in such a way that p remains unchanged, the
physical power of production proper to B would be unlimited and
B would not be considered as scarce and as an economic good. It
would be of no importance for acting man whether the supply of B
available were greater or smaller. Even an infinitesimal quantity of
R would be sufficient for the production of any quantity of D, provided the suppiy of C is large enough. O n the other hand, an increase in the quantity of B available could not increase the output of
D if the supply of C does not increase. T h e total return of the process
would be imputed to C; B could not be an economic good. A thing
rendering such unlimited services is, for instance, the knowledge of
the causal relation implied. T h e formula, the recipe, that teaches us
how to prepare coffee, provided it is known, renders unlimited
services. I t does not lose anything from its capacity to produce however often it is used; its productive power is inexhaustible; it is therefore not an economic good. Acting man is never faced with a situation
in which he must choose between the use-value of a known formula
and any other useful thing.
T h e law of returns asserts that for the combination of economic
goods of the higher orders (factors of production) there exists an
optimum. If one deviates from this optimum b y increasing the input
of only one of the factors, the physical output either does not increase at all or at least not in the ratio of the increased input. This
law, as has been demonstrated above, is implied in the fact that the
quantitative definiteness of the effects brought about by any economic good is a necessary condition of its being an economic good.
That there is such an optimum of combination is all that the law
of returns, popularly called the law of diminishing returns, teaches.
There are many other questions which it does not answer at all and
which can only be solved a posteriori by experience.
If the effect brought about by one of the compIementary factors
is indivisible, the optimum is the only combination which results in
the outcome aimed at. In order to dye a piece of wool to a definite
shade, a definite quantity of dye is required. A greater or smaller

,

.

Action Within the World

129

quantity would frustrate the aim sought. H e who has more coloring
matter must leave the surplus unused. H e who has a smaller quantity
can dye only a part of the piece. T h e diminishing return results in
this instance in the conlpletc uselessness of the additional quantity
which must not even be employed because it would thwart the
design.
In other instances a certain minimum is required for the production
of the minimum effect. Between this minimum effect and the optimal
effect there is a margin in which increased doses result either in a proportional increase in effect or in a more than proportional increase
in effect. In order to make a machine turn, a certain minimum of
lubricant is needed. Whether an increase of lubricant above this minimum increases the machine's performance in proportion to thc increase in the amount applied, or to a greater extent, can only be
ascertained by technological experience.
T h e law of returns does not answer the foIlowing questions: ( I )
Whether or not the optimum dose is the only one that is capable of
producing the efTect sought. ( 2 ) Whether or not there is a rigid
limit above which any increase in the amount of the variable factor
is quite useless. ( 3 ) Whether the decreasc in output brought about
by progressive deviation from the optimum and the increase in output brought about by progressive approach to the optimum result in
proportional or nonproportional changes in output per unit of the
variable factor. All this must be discerned bv experience. But the law
of returns itself, is., the fact that there mgst exist such an optimum
combination, is valid a priori.
T h e hlalthusian law of population and the concepts of absolute
overpopulation and underpopulation and optimum population derived from it are the application of the law of returns to a special
problem. They deal with changes in the supply of human labor, other
factors being equal. Because people, for political considerations,
wanted to reject the Malthusian law, they fought with passion but
with iauity arguments against the law of returns-which, incidentaiiy,
they knew only as the law of diminishing returns of the use of capital
a d labor on land. Today we no longer need to pay any attention to
these idle remonstrances. T h e Iaw of returns is not limited to the use
of complementary factors of production on land. T h e endeavors to
refute or to demonstrate its validity by historical and experimental
investigations of agricultural production are needless as they are vain.
H e who wants to reject the law would have to explain why people are
ready to pay prices for land. If the law were not valid, a farmer would

Human Action

130

never consider expanding the size of his farm. H e would be in a position t o multiply indefinitely the return of any piece of soil by muItiplying his input of capital and labor.
People have sometimes believed that, while the law of diminishing
returns is valid in agricultural production, with regard to the processing industries a law of increasing returns prevails. It took a long time
before they realized that the law of returns refers to all branches of
production equally. It is faulty to contrast agriculture and the processing industries with regard to this law. What is called-in a very
inexpedient, even misleading terminology-the law of increasing returns is nothing but a reversal of the law of diminishing returns, an
unsatisfactory formulation of the law of returns. If one approaches
the optimum combination b y increasing the quantity of one factor
only, the quantity of other factors remaining unchanged, then the
returns per unit of the variable factor increase either in proportion
to the increase or even to a greater extent. A machine may, when
operated by 2 workers, produce p; when operated b y 3 workers, 3 p;
when operated by 4 workcrs, 6 p; when operated by 5 workers, 7 p;
when operated by 6 workers, also not more than 7 p. Then the employment of 4 workers rendcrs the optimum return per head of the
worker, namely --6 p, while under the other combinations the returns
4

per head are respectively 1/2 p, p, 7 p and 2 p. If, instead of 2 workers,
5
6
3 or 4 workers are employed, then the returns increase more than in
relation to the increase in the number of workers; they do not increase
in the proportion 2 : 3:4, but in the proportion I : 3: 6. W e are faced
with increasing returns per head of the worker. 13ut this is nothing
eke than the reverse of the law of diminishing returns.
If a plant or enterprise deviates from the optimum combination of
the factors employed, it is less efficient than a plant or ~nterprise
for which the deviation from the optimum is smaller. Both in agriculture and in the processing industries many factors of production
are not perfectly divisible. I t is, especially in the processing industries,
for the most part easier to attain the optimum combination by expanding the size of the plant or enterprise than by restricting it. If
the smallest unit of one or of several factors is too large to allow for
its optimal exploitation in a small or medium-size plant or enterprise, the only way to attain the optimum is b y increasing the outfit's size. I t is these facts that bring about the superiority of big-scale
production. T h e full importance of this problem wilI be shown later
in discussing the issues of cost accounting.

Action Within the World

131

3. Human Labor as a Means
The employnlent of the physiological functions and manifestations
of human life as a means is called labor. The display of the potentialities of human energy and vital processes which the man whose life
they manifest does not usc for the attainment of external ends different from the mere running of these processes and from the physiological role they play in the biological consurnmation of his own
vital economy, is not labor; it is simply life. Man works in using his
forces and abilities as means for the removal of uneasiness and in
substituting purposeful exploitation of his vital energy for the spontaneous and carefree discharge of his faculties and nerve tensions.
Labor is a means, not an end in itself.
Every individual has only a limited quantity of energy to expend,
and every unit of labor can only bring about a limited effect. Otherwise human labor would be available in abundance; it would not be
scarce and it would not be considered as a means for the removal of
uneasiness and economized as such.
In a world in which labor is economized only on account of its being available in a quantity insufficient to attain all ends for which it
can be used as a means, the supply of labor available would be equal
to the whole quantity of labor which all men together are able to
expend. In such a world everybody would be eager to work until he
had completely exhausted his momentary capacity to work. The time
which is not required for recreation an2 restoration of the capacity
to work, used up by previous working, would be entirely devoted
to work. Every nonutilization of the full capacity to work would be
deemed a loss. Through the performance of more work one would
have increased one's well-being. That a part of the available potential
remained unused would be appraised as a forfeiture of well-being not
compensated by any corresponding increase in well-being. The very
idea of laziness would be unknown. Nobody would think: I could
possibly do this or that; but it is not worth while; it does not pay; I
prefer my leisure. Everybody would consider his whole capacity to
work as a supply of factors of production which he would be anxious
to utilize completely. Even a chance of the smallest increase in wellbeing would bc considered a sufficient incentive to work more if it
happened that at the instant no more profitable use could be made of
the quantity of labor concerned.
In our actual world things are different. The expenditure of labor
is deemed painful. hTot to work is considered a state of affairs more
satisfactory than working. Leisure is, other things being equal, pre-

132

Human Action

ferred to travail. People work only when they value the return of
labor higher than the decrease in satisfaction brought about by the
curtailment of leisure. T o work involves disutility.
Psychology and physiology may try to explain this fact. There
is no need for praxeology to invcstigke whcther or not they can
succeed in such endeavors. For praxeology it is a datum that men are
eager to enjoy leisure and therefore look upon their own capacity
to bring about effects with feelings different from those with which
they look upon the capacity of material factors of production. Man
in considering an expenditure of his own labor investigates not only
whether there is no more desirable end for the employment of the
quantity of labor in question, but no less whcther it would not be
more desirahlc to abstain from any further expenditure of labor.
W e can express this fact also in calling the attainment of leisure an
end of purposeful activity, or an economic good of the first order.
In employing this somewhat sophisticated terminology, we must view
leisure as any other economic good from the aspeGt of marginal utility. W e must conclude that the first unit of leisure satisfies a desire
more urgently felt than the sccond one, the second one a more urgent
desire than thc third one, and so on. Reversing this proposition, we
get the statement that the disutility of labor felt by the worker increases in a greater proportion than the amount of labor expended.
However, it is needless for praxeology to study the question of
whether or not the disutility of labor increases in proportion to the
increase in the quantity of labor performed or to a greater extent.
(Whether this problem is of any importance for physiology and
psychology, and whether or not these sciences can elucidate it, can
be left undecided.) At any rate the worker knocks off work at the
point at which he no longcr considers the utility of continuing work
as a sufficient compensation for the disutility of the additional expenditure of labor. In forming this judgment he contrasts, if we
disregard the decrease in yield brought about by increasing fatigue,
each por:i::E
of wOrkixg tiEe tt.icE, cI.,~
same mianritv
1
-."" "'J Of nrnanrt
rL-----2s
the preceding portions. But the utility of the units of yield decreases
with the progress of the labor performed and the increase in the
total amount of yield produced. The products of the prior units of
working time have provided for the satisfaction of more important
needs than the products of the work performed later. The satisfaction of these less important needs may not be considered as a
sufficientreward for the further continuation of work, although they
are compared with the same quantities of physical output.
It is therefore irreIevant for the praxeological treatment of the

Action Within the World

I33

matter whether the disutility of labor is proportional to the total
expenditure of labor or whether it increases to a greater extent than
the time spent in working. A t any rate, the propensity to expend the
still unused portions of the total potential for work decreases, other
things being equal, with the increase in the portions already expended. Whethcr this decrease in the readiness to work more proceeds
with a more rapid or a less rapid acceleration, is always a question of
economic data, not a question of categorial principles.
The disutility attached to labor explains why in the course of
human history, concomitantly with the progressive increase in the
physical productivity of labor brought about by technological improvement and a more abundant supply of capital, by and large a
tendency toward shortening the hours of work developed. Among
the amenities which civilized man can enjoy in a more abundant way
than his less civilized ancestors there is also the enjoyment of more
leisure time. In this sense one can answer the question, often raised
by philosophcrs and philanthropists, whether or not economic progress has made men happier. If the productivity of labor were lower
than it is in the present capitalist world, man would be forced either
to toil more or to forsake many amenities. In establishing this fact
the economists do not assert that the only means to attain happiness
is to enjoy more material comfort, to live in Iuxnry, or to have more
leisure. They simply acknowledge the truth that men are in a position to provide themselves better with what they consider they
need.
The fundamental praxeological insight that men prefer what satisfies them more to what satisfies them less and that they value things
on the basis of their utility does not need to be corrected or complemented by an additional statement concerning the disutility of labor.
Thcse propositions already imply the statement that labor is preferred
t o leisure only in so far as the yield of labor is more urgently desired
than the enjoyment of leisure.
T h e unique position which the factor labor occupies in our
world is due to its nonspecific character. All nature-given primary
factors of production-is., all those natural things and forces that
man can use for improving his state of well-being-have specific
powers and virtues. There are ends for whose attainment they are
more suitable, ends for which they arc less suitable, and ends for
which they are altogether unsuitable. But human labor is both suitable and indispensable for the performance of all thinkable processes
and modes of production.
It is, of course, impermissible to deal with human labor as such in

134

Human Action

general. It is a fundamental mistake not to see that men and their
abilities to work are different. The work a certain individual can
perform is more suitable for some ends, less suitable for other ends,
and altogether unsuitable for still other ends. It was one of the deficiencies of classical economics that it did not pay enough attention
to this fact and did not take it into account in the construction of
its theory of value, prices, and wage rates. Men do not economize
labor in general, but the particular kinds of labor available. Wages
are not paid for labor expended, but for the achievements of labor,
which differ widely in quality and quantity. T h e production of each
particular product requires the employment of workers able to perform the particular kind of labor concerned. It is absurd to justify
the failure to consider this point by reference to the alleged fact
that the main demand for and supply of labor concerns unskilled
common labor which evcry healthy man is able to perform, and that
skilled labor, the labor of people with particular inborn faculties
and special training, is by and large an exception. There is no need
to investigate whether conditions were such in a remote past or
whether even for primitive tribesmen the inequality of inborn and
acquired capacities for work was the main factor in economizing
labor. In dealing with conditions of civiIized peoples it is impermissible to disregard the differences in the quality of labor performed.
Work which various people are able to perform is different because men are born unequal and because the skill and experience
they acquire in the course of their lives differentiate their capacities
still more.
In speaking of the nonspecific character of human labor we certainly do not assert that all human labor is of the same quality. What
we want to establish is rather that the differences in the kind of labor
required for the production of various commodities are greater than
the differences in the inborn capacities of men. (In emphasizing this
point we are not dealing with the creative performances of the genius;
the work of the genius is outside the orbit of ordinary human action
and is like a free gift of destiny which comes to mankind o ~ e r n i g h t . ~
W e furthermore disregard the institutional barriers denying some
groups of people access to certain occupations and the training they
require.) The innate inequality of various individuals does not break
up the zoologicaf uniformity and homogeneity of the species man
to such an extent as to divide the supply of labor into disconnected
sections. Thus the potential supply of labor available for the performance of each particular kind of work exceeds the actuaI demand
6. See below, pp. 138-140.

Action Within the TVodd

135

for such labor. The supply of every kind of specialized labor could
be increased by the withdrawal of workers from other branches and
their training. The quantity of need satisfaction is in none of the
branches of production permanently limited by a scarcity of people
capable of performing special tasks. Only in the short run can there
emerge a dearth of specialists. In the long run it can be removed by
training people who display the innate abilities required.
Labor is the most scarce of all primary m a n s of production because it is in this restricted sense nonspecific and because every variety
of production requires the expenditure of labor. Thus the scarcity of
the other primary means. of production-i.e., the nonhuman means
of production supplied by nature-becomes for acting man a scarcity
of those primary material means of production whose utilization requires the smallest expenditure of labor.' It is the supply of labor
available that determines to what an extent the factor nature in each
of its varieties can be exploited for the satisfaction of needs.
If the supply of labor which men are able and ready to perform
increases, production increases too. Labor cannot remain unemployed
on account of its being useless for the further improvement of need
satisfaction. Isolated self-sufficient man always has the opportunity
of improving his condition by expending more labor. On the labor
market of a market society there are buyers for every supply of
labor offered. There can be abundance and superfluity only in segments of the labor market; it results in pushing labor to other segments
and in an expansion of production in some other provinces of the
economic system. On the other hand, an increase in the quantity of
land available-other things being equal-could result in an incrcase
in production only if the additional land is more fertile than the
marginal land tilled before.* The same is valid with regard to accumulated material equipment for future production. T h e serviceableness of capital goods also depends on the supply of labor available. It would be wasteful to use the capacity of existing facilities
if the labor required could be employed for the satisfaction of more
urgent needs.
Complementary factors of production can only be used to the extent allowed by the availability of the most scarce among them. Let
us assume that the production of I unit of p requires the expenditure
of 7 units of a and of 3 units of b and that neither a nor b can be used
7. Of course. some natural resources are so scarce that thev are entirelv
utilized.
8. Under free mobility of labor it would be waste to improve barren soil if
the reclaimed area is not so fertile that it compensates for the total cost of the
operation.

136
Human Action
for any production other than that of p. If 49 a and 2,000 b are available, no more than 7 p can be produced. The available supply of a
determines the extent of the use of b. Only a is considered an economic good; only for a are people ready to pay prices; the fulI price
of p is allowed for 7 units of a. On the other hand b is not an economic
good and no prices are allowed for it. There are quantities of b which
remain unused.
W e may try to imagine the conditions within a world in which all
material factors of production are so fully employed that there is no
opportunity to employ all men or to employ all men to the extent that
they are ready to work. In such a world labor is abundant; an increase in the supply of labor cannot add any increment whatever to
the total amount of prod~~ction.
If we assume that a11 men have the
same capacity and application for work and if we disregard the disutility of labor, labor in such a urorId would not be an economic good.
If this world were a socialist commonwealth, an increase in population
figures would be deemed an increase in the number of idle consumers.
If it were a market society, wage rates paid would not be enough to
prevent starvation. Those seeking employment would be ready to
go to work for any wages, however low, even if insufficient for the
preservation of their lives. They mould be happy to delay for a while
death by starvation.
There is no need to dwell upon the paradoxes of this hypothesis and
to discuss the problems of such a world. Our world is different. Labor
is more scarce than material factors of production. W e are not dealing at this point with the problcrn of optimum population. We are
dealing only with the fact that there are material factors of production which remain unused because the labor required is needed for
the satisfaction of more urgent needs. In our world there is no abundance, but a shortage of manpower, and there are unused material
factors of production, i.e., land, mineral deposits, and even plants and
equipment.
This state of affairs could be changed by such an increase in population figures that all material factors required for the production of
the foodstuffs indispensable-in the strict meaning of the word-for
the preservation of human life are fully exploited. But as long as this
is not the case, it cannot be changed by any improvement in technological methods of production. The substitution of more efficient
methods of production for less efficient ones does not render labor
abundant, provided there are still material factors available whose utilization can increase human well-being. On the contrary, it increases
output and thereby the quantity of consumers' goods. "Labor-saving"

Action Within the W o r l d
devices reduce want. T h e y do not bring about "technological unemployment."
Every product is the result of the enlployment both of labor and of
material factors. Man economizes both labor and material factors.

Immediately Gratifying Labor and Mediately Gratifying Labor
As a rule labor gratifies the performer only mediately, namely, through
the removal of uneasiness which the attainment of the end brings about.
The worker gives up leisure and submits to thc disutility of labor in order
to enjoy either the product or what other people arc ready to give him
for it. The expenditure of labor is for him a means for the attainment of
certain cnds, a price paid and a cost incurred.
But there are instances in which the performance of labor gratifies the
worker immediately. H e derives immediate satisfaction from thc expcnditure of labor. The yield is twofold. It consists on the one hand in the attainment of the product and on the other hand in the satisfaction that the
performance itself gives to the worltcr.
People have misinterpreted this fact grotesquely and have based on this
misinterpretation fantastic plans for social reforms. One of the main dogmas of socialism is that labor has disutility only within thc capitalist system
of production, while under socialism it will be pure delight. W e may disregard the effusions of the poor lunatic Charles Fourier. But Marxian
"scientific" socialism does not differ in this point from thc utopians. One
of its foremost champions, Karl Kautsky, expressly declares that a chief
task of a proletarian regime will be to transform labor from a pain into a
pleasure."
The fact is often ignored that those activities which bring about immediate gratification and are thus direct sources of pleasure and enjoyment,
are essentially different from labor and working. Only a very superficial treatment of the facts concerned can fail to recognize these differences. Paddling a canoc as it is practiced on Sundays for amusement on the
lakes of public parks can only from the point of view of hydromechanics
be likened to the rowing of boatsmen and galley slaves. When judged as a
means for the attainment of ends it is as different as is the humming of an
aria by a rambler from the recital of the same aria by the singer in the
opera. The carefree Sunday paddler and the singing rambler derive immediate gratification from their activities, but no mediate gratification.
What they do is therefore not labor, not the employment of their physiological functions for the attainment of ends other than the mere exercise
of these functions. It is merely pleasure. It is an end in itself; it is done for
its own sake and does not render any further service. As it is not labor, it
is not permissible to call it immediately gratifying labor.1°
9. Karl Kautsky, Die soziale Revolution (3d ed. Berlin, I ~ I I ) ,11, 16ff.
10. Rowing seriously practiced as a sport and singing seriously practiced by
an amareur are introversive labor. See below, pp. 584-585.

138

Human Action

Sometimes a superficial observer may believe that labor performed by
other people gives rise to immediate gratification because he himself
would like to engage in a kind of play which apparently imitates the kind
of labor concerned. As children play schooI, soldiers, and railroad, so
adults too would like to play this and that. They think that the railroad
engineer must enjoy operating and steering his engine as much as they
would if they were permitted to toy with it. On his hurried way to office
the bookkeeper envies the patrolman who, hc thinks, is paid for leisurely
strolling around his beat. B L I ~
the patrohan envies the bookkeeper who,
sitting on a con~fortablechair in a well-heated room, makes money by some
scribbling which cannot seriously be called labor. Yet the opinions of
people who misinterpret other people's work and consider it a mere pastime need not be taken seriously.
Thcre are, however, also instances of genuine immediately gratifying
labor. There are some kinds of labor of which, under special conditions,
small quantities provide immediate gratification. But these quantities are so
insignificant that they do not play any role at all in the complex of human
action and production for the satisfaction of wants. Our world is characterized by the phenomenon of the disutility of labor. People trade the
disutility-bringing labor for the products of labor; labor is for them a
source of mediate gratification.
If a special kind of labor gives pleasure and not pain, immediate gratification and not disutility of labor, no wages are allowed for its performance.
On the contrary, the performer, the 'korker," must buy the pleasure and
pay for it. Hunting game was and is for many people regular disutilitycreating labor. But there are people for whom it is pure pleasure. In Europe
amateur hunters buy from the owner of the hunting-ground the right to
shoot a definite number of game of a definite typc. The purchase of this
right is scparated from the price to bc paid for the bag. If the two purchases are linked together, the price by far exceeds the prices that can be
obtained on the market for the bag. A chamois buck still roaming on the
precipitous rocks has therefore a higher cash value than later when killed,
brought down to the valley, and ready for the utilization of the meat, the
skin, and the horns, although strenuous climbing and some material must
be expended for its killing. One could say that one of the services which a
living buck is able to render is to provide the hunter with the pleasure of
killing it.

The Creative Genius
Far above the millions that come and pass away tower the pioneers, the
men whose deeds and ideas cut out new paths for mankind. For the
pioneering genius to create is the essence of life. T o live means for him
to create.
1 1 . Leaders (F~hrers)are not ioneers. They guide people along the tracks
pioneers have laid. The pioneer c ears a road through Iand hitherto inaccessible

I)

Action Within the World
The activities of these prodigious men cannot be fully subsumed under
the praxeological concept of labor. They are not labor because they are for
the genius not means, but ends in themselves. H e lives in creating and inventing. For him there is no leisure, only intermissions of temporary
sterility and frustration. His incentive is not the desire to bring about a
result, but the act of producing it. T h e accomplishment gratifies him
neither mediately nor immediately. It does not gratify him mediately because his fellow men at best are unconcerned about it, more often even
greet it with taunts, sneers, and persecution. Many a genius could have
used his gifts to render his life agreeable and joyful; he did not even consider such a possibility and chose the thorny path without hesitation. T h e
genius wants to accomplish what he considers his ~nission,even if he knows
that he moves toward his own disaster.
Neither does the genius derive immediate gratification from his creative
activities. Creating is for him agony and torment, a ceaseless excruciating
struggle against internal and external obstacles; it consumes and crushes
him. T h e Austrian poet GriIlparzer has depicted this in a touching poem
"Farewell to Gastein." l2 W e may assume that in writing it he thought not
only of his own sorrows and tribulations but also of the greater sufferings
of a much greater man, of Beethoven, whose fate resembled his own and
whom he understood, through devoted affection and sympathetic appreciation, better than any other of his contemporaries. Kietzsche compared himself to the flame that insatiably consumes and destroys itself.'"
Such agonies are phenomena which have nothing in common with the
connotations generally attached to the notions of work and labor, production and success, breadwinning and enjoyment of life.
The achievements of the creative innovator, his thoughts and theories,
his poems, paintings, and compositions, cannot be classified praxeologically
as products of labor. They are not the outcome of the employment of
labor which could have been devoted to the production of other amenities
for the "production" of a masterpiece of philosophy, art, or literature.
Thinkers, poets, and artists are sometimes unfit to accomplish any other
work. A t any rate, the time and toil which they devote to creative activities
are not withheld from empioyment for other purposes. Conditions may
someti~nesdoom to sterility a man who would have had the power to bring
fcw+h + h i m g S ==heard Of; they m-ay !ca.re him c o a!tern2tiveC?t!lPrthax c=
die from starvation or to use all his forces in the struggle for mere physical
survival. But if the genius succeeds in achieving his goals, nobody but himself pays the "costs" incurred. Goethe was perhaps in some respects ham*-,*.a.

.A&---

and may not care whether or not anybody wants to go the new way. The leader
directs ~eopletoward the goal they want to reach.
1 2 . It seems that there is no English translation of this poem. The book of
Douglas Yates (Franz Grillparzer, a Critical Biography, Oxford, 1946), I , 57,
gives a short English resum6 of its content.
13. For a translation of Nictzsche's poem see M. A. Miigge, Friedricb Nietzscbe
(New York, 191I ) , p. 275.

140

Hriman Action

pered by his functions at the court of Weimar. But certainly he would not
have accomplished more in his official duties as minister of state, theatre
manager, and administrator of mines if he had not written his plays, poems,
and novels.
It is, furthermore, impossible to substitute other people's work for that
of the creators. If Dante and Beethoven had not existed, one would not
have been in a position to produce the Divina Corwwzedia or the Ninth
Symphony by assigning other men to these tasks. hTeither society nor
single individuals can substantially further the genius and his work. The
highest intensity of the "dcmand" and the most peremptory order of the
government are incfiectual. The genius does not deliver to order. ,Men
cannot improve the natural and social conditions which bring about the
creator and his creation, It is impossible to rear geniuses by eugenics, to
train them by schooling, or to organize their activities. But, of course, one
can organize society in such a way that no room is left for pioneers and
their path-breaking.
The creative accomplishment of the genius is an ultimate fact for praxeology. It comes to pass in history as a free gift of destiny. It is by no means
the result of production in the sense in which economics uses this term.

4. Production
Action, if successful, attains the end sought. It produces the product.
Production is not an act of creation; it does not bring about something that did not exist before. It is a transformation of given elements through arrangement and combination. The producer is not a
creator. Alan is creative only in thinking and in the realm of imagination. In the world of external phenomena he is only a transformer.
All that he can accomplish is to combine the means available in such
a way that according to the laws of nature the result aimed at is bound
to emerge.
It was once customary to distinguish between the production of
tangible goods and the rendering of personal services. T h e carpenter
who made tables and chairs was called productive; but this epithet
v\ a2 dLluLu
-..:,-.a +rv the doctor whose advice heJpei: the d i n g carpeilter t o

.....
p

recover his capacity to make tables and chairs. A differentiation was
made between the doctor-carpenter nexus and the carpenter-tailor
nexus. T h e doctor, it was asserted, does not himself produce; he makes
a living from what other people produce, he is maintained by carpenters and tailors. A t a still earlier date the French ~ h ~ s i o c r a i s
contended that all labor was sterile unless it extracted something from
the soil. Only cultivation, fishing and hunting, and the working of
mines and quarries were in their opinion productive. T h e processing
industries did not add to the value of the materia1 employed any-

Action Within the World

141

thing more than the value of the things consumed by the workers.
Present-day economists laugh at their predecessors for having ~ n a d e
such untenable distinctions. However, they should rather cast the
beam out of their own eyes. T h e way in which many contemporary
writers deal with various problems-for instance, advertising and
marlteting-is manifestly a relapse into the crude errors which should
have disappeared long ago.
Another widely held opinion finds a difference between the employment of labor and that of material factors of production. Nature,
it is asserted, dispenses its gifts gratuitously; but labor must be paid
for b y submitting to its disutility. In toiling and overcoming the
disutility of labor man adds something to the universe that did not
exist before. In this sense labor is creative. This too is erroneous. Man's
capacity to work is given in the univcrse as are the original and inherent capacities of the land and the animal substances. Nor does the
fact that a part of the potcntiaIity of labor can remain unused differentiate it from the nonhvman factors of production; these too can
rernain unused. The readiness of individuals to overcome the disutility of labor is the outcome of the fact that they prefer the produce
of labor to the satisfaction derived from more leisure.
Only the human ~nindthat directs action and production is creative.
T h e mind too appertains to the universe and to nature; it is a part
of the given and existing world. To call the mind creative is not to
indulge in any metaphysical speculations. W e call it creative because w c are at a loss to trace the changes brought about by human
action farther back than to the point at which we arc faced with the
intervention of reason directing human activities. Production is not
something physical, natural, and external; it is a spiritual and intellectual phenomenon. Its essential requisites are not human labor and
external naturaI forces and things, but the decision of the mind to use
these factors as means for thc attainment of ends. What produces the
product is not toil and trouble in themsclvcs, but the fact that the
toilers are guided by reason. T h e human mind aIonc has the power to
remove uneasiness.
T h e materialist metaphysics of the Marxians misconstrues these
things entirely. T h e "productive forces" are not material. Production
is a spiritual, intellectual, and ideological phenomenon. I t is the
mcthod that man, directed b y reason, employs for the best possible
removal of uneasiness. W h a t distinguishes our conditions from those
of our ancestors who lived one thousand or twenty thousand years
ago is not something material, but something spiritual. T h e material
changes are thc outcome of the spiritual changes.

142

Human Action

Production is alteration of the given according to the designs of
reason. These designs-the recipes, the formulas, the ideologies-are
the primary thing; they transform the original factors-both human
and nonhuman-into means. Man produces by dint of his reason; he
chooses ends and employs means for their attainment. T h e popular
saying according to which economics deals with the material conditions of human life is entirely mistaken. Human action is a manifestation of the mind. In this sense praxeology can be called a moral science

(Geisteswissenschaft) .

Of course, we do not know what mind is, just as we do not know
what motion, life, electricity are. Mind is simply the word to signify
the unknown factor that has enabled men to achieve all that they
have accomplished: the theories and the poems, the cathedrals and
the symphonies, the motorcars and the airplanes.

Part Two

Action Within the Framework of Society

VIII. HUMAN SOCIETY
I.

H u m a n Cooperation

.TY is concerted action, cooperation.
Soc;ciety
is the outcome of conscious and purposeful behavior.
This does not mean that individuals have concluded contracts by
virtue of which they have founded human society. T h e actions which
have brought about social cooperation and daily bring it about anew
d o not aim at anything else than cooperation and coadjuvancy with
others for the attainment of definite singular ends. T h e total complex
of the mutual relations created by such concerted actions is called
society. It substitutes collaboration for the-at least conceivableisolated life of individuals. Society is division of labor and combination of labbr. In his capacity as an acting animal man becomes a
social animal.
Individual man is born into a socially organized environment. In
this sense alone we may accept the saying that society is-logically
or historicalIy-antecedent to the individual. In every other sense
this dictum is either empty or nonsensical. The individual lives and
acts within society. But society is nothing but the combination of
individuals for cooperative effort. I t exists nowhere else than in the
actions of individual men. I t is a delusion to search for it outside the
actions of individuals. T o speak of a society's autonomous and independent existence, of its life, its soul, and its actions is a metaphor
which can easily lead to crass errors.
T h e questions whether society or the individual is to be considered
as the uitimate end, and whether the interests of society should be
subordinated to those of the individuals or the interests of the individuals to those of society are fruitless. Action is always action of individual men. T h e social or societal element is a certain orientation
of the actions of individual men. T h e category end makes sense only
when applied to action. Theology and the metaphysics of history
may discuss the ends of society and the designs which God wants to
realize with regard to society in the same way in which they discuss
the purpose of all other parts of the created universe. For science,
which is inseparable from reason, a tool manifestly unfit for the

'44
Human Action
treatment of such problems, it would be hopeless to embark upon
speculations concerning these matters.
Within the frame of social cooperation there can emerge between
members of society feelings of sympathy and friendship and a sense
of belonging together. These feelings arc the source of man's most
delightful and most sublime experiences. They are the most precious
adornment of life; they lift the animal species man to the heights of
a really human existence. However, they are not, as some have asserted, the agcnts that have brought about social relationships. They
are fruits of social cooperation, they thrive only within its frame;
they did not precede the establishment of social relations and are not
the seed from which they spring.
The fundamental facts that brought about cooperation, society,
and civilization and transformed the animal man into a human being
are the facts that work performed under the division of labor is more
productive than isolated work and that man's reason is capable of
recognizing this truth. Rut for these facts men would have forever
remained deadly foes of one another, irreconcilable rivals in their
endeavors to secure a portion of the scarce supply of means of sustenance provided by nature. Each man would have been forced to
view all othcr inen as his enemies; his craving for the satisfaction of
his own appetites would have brought him into an implacable conflict with all his neighbors. N o sympathy could possibly develop under
such a state of affairs.
Some sociologists have asserted that the original and elementary
subjective fact in society is a "consciousness of kind." Others maintain that there would be no social systems if there were no "sense of
communi~yor of belonging together." " One may agree, provided that
these somcwhat vague and ambiguous terms are correctly interpreted. W e may call consciousness of kind, sense of community, or
sense of belonging together the acknowledgment of the fact that all
other human beings are potential collaborators in the struggle for
survival because they are capabie of recognizing the mutuai benefits
of cooperation, while the animals lack this faculty. However, we
must not forget that the primary facts that bring about such consciousness or such a sense are the two mentioned above. In a hppothetical world in which the division of labor would not increase
productivity, there would not be any society. There would not be
any sentiments of benevolence and good will.
The principle of the division of Iabor is one of the great basic prinI.
2.

I?. H . Giddings, T h e Principles o f Sociology (New York, r9z6), p. 17.
R. M . MacIver, Society (New York, 1937). pp. 6-7.

Human Society

I45

ciples of cosmic becoming and evolutionary change. T h e biologists
were right in borrowing the concept of the division of labor from
social philosophy and in adapting it to their field of investigation.
There is division of labor between the various parts of any living
organism. There are, furthermore, organic entities composed of collaborating animal individuals; it is customary to call metaphorically
such aggregations of the ants and bees "animal societies." But one
must never forget that the characteristic feature of human society is
purposeful cooperation; society is an outcome of human action, i.e.,
of a conscious aiming at the attainment of ends. N o such clement is
present, as far as we can ascertain, in the processes which have resulted in the emergence of the structure-function systems of plant
and animal bodies and in the operation of thc societies of ants, bees,
and hornets. Human society is an intellectual and spiritual phenomenon. It is the outcome of a purposeful utilization of a universal law
determining cosmic becoming, viz., the higher productivity of the
division of labor. As with every instance of action, the recognition of
the laws of nature is put into the service of man's efforts to improve
his conditions.
2.

A Critique of t h e Holistic and MetaphysicaI
V i e w of Society

According to the doctrines of universalism, conceptual realism,
holism, collectivism, and some representatives of Gestaltp~ychologie~
society is an entity living its own life, independent of and separate
from the lives of the various individuals, acting on its own behalf and
aiming at its own ends which are different from the ends sought by
the individuals. Then, of course, an antagonism between the aims of
society and those of its members can emerge. In order to safeguard
the flowering and further developmcnt of society it becomes necessary to master the selfishness of the individuals anb to compel them to
sacrifice their ~-au----r r n i c t i rd ~ c i p s
--"- to benefit ef society. At this pin:
all these holistic doctrines are bound to abandon the secular methods
of human science and logical reasoning and to shift to theologicaI or
metaphysical professions of faith. They must assume that Providence,
through its prophets. apostles, and charismatic leaders, forces men
who are constitutionally wiclted, i.e., prone to pursue their own ends,
t o walk in the ways of righteousness which the Lord or Weltgeist or
history wants them to walk.
This is the philosophy which has characterized from time immemorial the creeds of primitive tribes. It has been an element in all

146

Human Action

religious teachings. Man is bound to comply with the law issued by
a superhuman power and to obey the authorities which this power
has entrusted with the enforccment of the law. T h e order created by
this law, human society, is consequently the work of the Deity and
not of man. If the Lord had not interfered and had not given enlightenment to erring mankind, society would not have come into
existence. It is true that social cooperation is a blessing for man; it is
true that man could work his way up from barbarism and the moral
and material distress of his primitive state only within the framework
of society. However, if lcft alone hc would never have sccn the road
to his own salvation. For adjustment to the requiremcnts of social
cooperation and subordination to the precepts of the moral law put
heavy restraints upon him. From the point of view of his wretched
intellect he would deem the abandonment of some expected advantage an evil and a privation. H e would fail to recognize the incomparably greater, but later, advantages which renunciation of
present and visible pleasures will procure. But for supernatural revelation he would never have learned what destiny wants him to do for
his ow-n good and that of his offspring.
T h e scientific theory as deveIoped by the social philosophy of
eighteenth-century rationalism and modcrn economics does not resort t o any miraculous interference of superhuman powers. Every
step b y which an individual substitutes concerted action for isolated
action results in an immediate and recognizable improvement in his
conditions. T h e advantages derivcd from peaceful cooperation and
division of labor are universal. They immediately benefit every generation, and not only Iater descendants. For what the individual must
sacrifice for the sake of society he is amply conpcnsated b y greater
advantages. His sacrifice is only apparent and temporary; he foregoes
a sn~allergain in order to reap a greatcr one later. N o reasonable being can fail to see this obvious fact. When social cooperation is intensified by enlarging the field in which there is division of labor or
when !ega! p t ~ ~ t i2nd
~ fthei s 2 f eb--m i ~ r d i n gnf peace are str~no.thrnrrl,
--"
the incentive is the desire of all those concerned to improve their own
conditions. In striving after his own-rightly understood-interests
the individual works toward an intensification of social cooperation
and peaceful intercourse. Society is a product of human action, i.e.,
the human urge to remove uneasiness as far as possible. In order to
explain its becoming and its evolution it is not necessary to have
recourse to a doctrine, certainly offensive to a truly religious mind,
according to which the original creation was so defective that reiterated superhuman intervention is needed to prevent its failure.

Human Society

I47

The historical role of the theory of the division of labor as elaborated by British political economy from Hume to Ricardo consisted in the cornplete demolition of all metaphysical doctrines
concerning the origin and the operation of social cooperation. It
consummated the spiritual, moral and intellectuaI emancipation of
mankind inaugurated by the philosophy of Epicureanism. It substituted an autonomous rational morality for the hctcronomous and
intuitionist ethics of older days. Law and legality, the moral code and
social institutions are no longer revered as unfathomable decrees of
Heaven. They are of human origin, and the only yardstick that must
be applied to them is that of expediency with regard to human welfare. T h c utilitarian economist does not say: Fiat justitia, pereat mundus. He says: Fiat justitia, nc pcreat mundus. He does not ask a man to
renounce his well-being for the bencfit of society. H e advises him to
recognize what his rightly understood interests are. In his eyes God's
magnificence does not manifest itseIf in busy interference with sundry
affairs of princes and politicians, but in endowing his creatures with
reason and the urge toward the pursuit of happiness."
The essential problem of all varieties of universalistic, coIlectivistic,
and holistic social philosophy is: By what mark do I recognize the
true law, the authentic apostIe of God's word, and the legitimate
authority. For many claim that Providence has sent them, and each
of these prophets preaches another gospel. For the faithful believer
there cannot he any doubt; he is fully confident that he has espoused
the only true doctrine. But it is precisely the firmness of such beliefs
that renders the antagonisms irreconcilable. Each party is prepared
to make its own tenets prevail. But as Iogical argumentation cannot
decide between various dissenting creeds, there is no means left for
the settlement of such disputes other than armed conflict. T h e nonrationalist, nonutilitarian, and nonliberaI social doctrines must beget
wars and civil wars until one of the adversaries is annihilated or subdued. The history of the world's great religions is a record of battles
3 . Many economists, among them Adam Smith and Bastiat, believed in God.
Hence they admired in the facts they had discovered the providential care of
"the great Director of Nature." Atheist critics blame them for this attitude.
However, these critics fail to realize that to sneer at the references to the "invisible hand" does not invaIidate the essential teachings of the rationalist and
utilitarian social philosophy. One must comprehend that the alternative is this:
Either association is a human process because it best serves the aims of the individuals concerned and the individuals themselves have the ability t o realize
the advantages they derive from their adjustment t o life in social cooperation.
O r a superior being enjoins upon reluctant men subordination t o the law and
to the social authorities. I t is of minor importance whether one calls this supreme being God, Weltgcist, Destiny, History, Wotan, o r Productive Forces
and what title one assigns to its apostles, the dictators.

148
Human Action
and wars, as is the history of the present-day counterfeit religions,
socialism, statolatry, and nationalism.
Intolerance and propaganda by the executioner's or the soldier's
sword are inherent in any system of heteronomous ethics. The laws
of God or Destiny claim universal validity, and to the authorities
which they declare Iegitirnate all men by rights owe obedience. As
ions as the prestige of heteronomous codes of morality and of their
philosophical corollary, conceptual realism, was intact, there could
not be any question of tolerance or of lasting peace. When fighting
ccascd, it was only to g-ather new strength for further battling. The
idea of tolerance with regard to othcr people's dissenting views could
take root only whcn the liberal doctrines had broken the spell of
universalism. In the light of the utilitarian philosophy, society and
state no longer appear as institutions for the maintenance of a world
ordcr that for considerations hidden to the human mind pleases the
Deity although it manifestly hurts the secular interests of many or
even of the immense majority of those living today. Societv and
state are on the contrary the primary means for a11 people to attain
the ends they aim at of their own accord. They are created by human
effort and their maiiltenance and most suitable organization are a
task not essentially different from all other concerns of human action.
The supporters of a heteronomous morality and of the collectivistic
doctrine cannot hope to demonstrate by ratiocination the correctness of their spccific variety of ethical pEinciples and the superiority
and exclusive legitimacy of their particular social ideal. They are
forced to ask people to accept credulously their ideological system
and to surrender to the authority they consider the right one; they
are intent upon silencing dissenters or upon beating them into submission.
Of course, there will always be individuals and groups of individuals whose inrellcct is so narrow that they cannot grasp the benefits
which social cooperation brings them. There are others whose moral
strength and will power are so weak that they cannot resist the temptation to strivc for an ephemeral advantage by actions dctrimental
to the smooth functioning of the social system. For the adjustment of
the individual to the requircrnents of social cooperation demands
sacrifices. Thesc are, it is true, only temporary and apparent sacrifices as they are more than cornpensatcd for by the incomparably
grcater advantages w-hich living within society provides. However, at
the instant, in the very act of renouncing an expected enjoyment,
they are painful, and it is not for everybody to realize their later
benefits and to behave accordingly. Anarchism believes that educa-

Human Society

149

tion could make all people comprehend what their own interests require them to do; rightly instructed they would of their own accord
always comply with the rules of conduct indispensable for the preservation of society. T h e anarchists contend that a social order in
which nobody enjoys privileges at the expense of his fellow-citizens
could exist without any compulsion and cocrcion for the prevention
of action detrimental to society. Such an ideal society could do
without state and government; i.e., without a police force, the social
apparatus of coercion and compulsion.
T h e anarchists overlook the undeniable fact that some people are
either too narrow-minded o r too weak to adjust thernselves spontaneously to the conditions of social life. Even if we admit that every
sane adult is endowed with the faculty of realizing the good of
socia1 cooperation and of acting accordingly, there still remains the
problem of the infants, the aged, and the insane. W e may agree that
he who acts antisocially should be considered mentally sick and in
need of care. But as long as not all are cured, and as long as there are
infants and the senile, some provision must be taken lest they jeopardize society. An anarchistic society would be exposed to the mercy of
every individual. Society cannot exist if the majority is not ready to
hinder, by the application or threat of violent action, minorities from
destroying the social order. This power is vested in the state or government.
State or government is the social apparatus of compulsion and
coercion. It has the monopoly of violent action. N o individual is
free to use violence or the threat of violence if the government has
not accorded this right to him. The state is essentially an institution
for the preservation of peaceful interhuman relations. However, for
the preservation of peace it must be prepared to crush the onslaughts
of peace-breakers.
Liberal social doctrine, based on the teachings of utilitarian ethics
arid economics, sees the problem of the relation between the government and those ruled from a different angle than universalism and
collectivism. Liberalism realizes that the rulers, who are always a
minority, cannot lastingly remain in office if not supported b i the
consent of the majority of those ruled. Whatever the system of
government may be, the foundation upon which it is built and rests
is always the opinion of those ruled that to obey and to be loyal to this
government better serves their own interests than insurrection and
the establishment of another regime. T h e majority has the power to
d o away with an unpopular government and uses this power whenever it becomes convinced that its own welfare requires it. In the

150
Human Action
long run there is no such thing as an unpopular government. Civil war
and revolution are the means by which thc discontented majorities
overthrow' rulers and methods of government which do not suit
them. For the sake of domestic peace liberalism aims at democratic
government. Democracy is therefore not a revolutionary institution.
On the contrary, it is the very means of preventing revolutions and
civil wars. It provides a method for the peaceful adjustment of government to the will of the majority. When the men in office arid their
policies no longer please the majority of the nation, they will-in the
next election-be eliminated and replaced by other men espousing
different policies.
The principle of majority rule or'government by the people as
recommended by liberalism does not aim at the supremacy of the
average or common marl. It certainly does not mean, as some critics
assert, the advocacy of the rule of the mean, of the lowbred, of the
domestic barbarians. The liberals too believe that a nation should be
ruled by those best fitted for this task. But they believe that a man's
ability to rule proves itself better by convincing his fellow-citizens
than by using force upon them. There is, of course, no guarantee that
the voters will entrust office to the most cornpetcnt candidate. But
no other system could offer such a guarantee. If the majority of the
nation is committed to unsound principles and prefers unworthy
office-seekers, there is no remedy other than to try to change their
mind by expounding more reasonable principles and recommending
better men. A minority wilI never win lasting success by other means.
Universalism and collectivism cannot accept this democratic solution of the problem of government. I11 their opinion the individual
in complying with the ethical code does not directly further his
earthly concerns but, on the contrary, foregoes the attainment of his
own ends for the benefit of the designs of the Deity or of the collective whole. Moreover reason alone is not capable of conceiving
the supremacy of the absolute values and the unconditional validity
of rhe sacred iaw and of interpreting correctiy the canons and commandments. Hence it is in their eyes a hopeless task to try to convince the majority through persuasion and to lead them to ;ighteousness by amicable admonition. Those blessed by heavenly inspiration,
to whom their charisma has conveyed illumination, have the duty
to propagate the gospel to the docile and to resort to violence against
the intractable. The charismatic leader is the Deity's vicar, the mandatory of the collective whole, the tool of history. H e is infallible
and always right. His orders are the supreme norm.
Universalism and collectivism arc by necessity systems of theocratic

Human Society

IS1

government. T h e common characteristic of all their varieties is that
they postulate the existence of a supcrhurnan entity which the individuals are bound to obey. What differentiates them from one
another is only the appellation they give to this entity and the content
of the laws they proclaim in its name. The dictatorial rule of a minority cannot find any legitimation other than the appeal to an alleged
~nandatcobtained from a superhuman absolute authority. It does not
matter whether the absolute ruler bases his claims on the divine rights
of anointed kings or on the historical mission of the vanguard of the
proletariat or whether the supreme being is called Geist (Hegel) or
Humanit; (Auguste Comte) . T h e terms society and state as they are
used by the contemporary advocates of socialism, planning, and social
contro1 of all the activities of individuals signify a deity. The priests
of this new creed ascribe to their idol all those attributes which the
theologians ascribe to God-omnipotence, omniscience, infinite goodness, and so on.
If one assumes that there exists above and beyond the individual's
actions an imperishable entity aiming at its own ends, different from
those of mortal men, one has already constructed the concept of a
superhuman being. Then one cannot evade the question whose ends
take precedence whenever an antagonism arises, those of the state or
society or those of the individual. The answer to this question is
already implied in the very concept of state or society as conceived
by collectivism and universalism. If one postulates the existence of
an entity which ex definitione is higher, nobler, and better than the
individuals, then there cannot be any doubt that the aims of this
eminent being must tower above those of the wretched individuals.
(It is true that some lovers of paradox-for instance, Max Stirner 4took pleasure in turning the matter upside down and for all that
asserted the precedence of the individual.) If society or state is an
entity endowed with volition and intention and all the other qualities
attributed to it by the collectivist doctrine, then it is simply nonsensical to sct the shabby iddividual's trivial aims against its lofty
designs.
The quasi-theological character of all collectivist doctrines becomes manifest in their mutual conflicts. A collectivist doctrine does
not assert the superiority of a collective whole in abstracto; it always
proclaims the eminence of a definite collectivist idol, and either flatly
denies the existence of other such idols or relegates them to a subordinate and ancillary position with regard to its own idol. The
4. Cf. Max Stirner (Johann Kaspar Schmidt), The Ego and His Own, trans.
by S. T. Byington (New York, 1 ~ 7 ) .

Human Action
worshipers of the state proclaim the excellence of a definite state,
i.e., their own; the nationalists, the excellence of their own nation.
If dissenters challenge their particular program by heralding the
superiority of another collectivist idol they resort to no objection
other than to declare again and again: We are right bccause an inner
voice tells us that we are right and you are wrong. The conflicts of
antagonistic coIlcctivist creeds and sects cannot be decided by ratiocination; they must be decided by arms. T h e aIternatives to the
lit~eraland democratic principle of majority rule are the militarist
principles of armed conflict: and dictatorial oppression.
All varieties of collectivist creeds are united in their implacable
hostility to the fundamental political institutions of the liberal system:
majority rule, tolerance of dissenting views, freedom of thought,
speech, and the press, equaIity of all men under the law. This collaboration of collectivist creeds in their attempts to destroy freedom has brought about the mistaken belief that the issue in presentday political antagonisms is individualism versus collectivisn~.In fact
it is a struggle between individualism on the one hand and a multitude
of collectivist sects on the other hand whose mutuaI hatred and
hostility is no less ferocious than their abomination of the liberal
system. It is not a uniform Marxian sect that attacks capitalism, but a
host of Mamian groups. These groups-for instance, Stalinists, Trotskyists, Mensheviks, supporters of the Second International, and so
on-fight one another with the utmost brutality and inhumanity.
And then there are again many other non-Marxian sects which apply
the same atrocious methods in their mutuaI struggles. A substitution
of collectivism for liberalism would result in endless bloody fighting.
T h e customary terminology misrepresents these things entirely.
The philosophy commonly called individualism is a philosophy of
social cooperation and t h i progressive intensification of the social
nexus. On the other hand the application of the basic ideas of collectivism cannot result in anything but social disintegration and the
p c r ~ e t m t i ~ofr . armed conflic:. 1: is :ric that e v i v vxietji of collectivism promises eternal peace starting with the day of its own
decisive victory and the final overthrow and extermination of all
other ideologies and their supporters. However, the realization of
these plans is conditioned upon a radical transformation in mankind.
Men must be divided into two classcs: the omnipotent godlike dictator
on the one hand and the masses which must surrender volition and
reasoning in order to become mere chessmen in the plans of the
dictator. T h e masses must be dehumanized in order to make one
man their godlike master. Thinking and acting, the foremost char-

Hurnaa Society

153

acteristics of man as man, would become the privilege of one man
only. There is no need to ~ o i n tout that such designs are unrealizable.
T h e chiliastic empires of dictators are doomed to failure; they have
nevcr lasted longer than a few years. W e have just witnessed the
breakdown of several of such "millennial" orders. Those remaining
will hardly fare better.
T h e modern revival of the idea of coIlectivism, the main cause of
all the agonies and disasters of our day, has succeeded so thoroughly
that it has brought into oblivion thc essential ideas of liberal social
philosophy. Today even many of those favoring democratic institutions ignore thesc ideas. T h c arguments they bring forward for the
justification of freedom and democracy are tainted with collectivist
errors; their doctrines are rather a distortion than an endorsement of
true liberalism. In their eyes majorities are always right simply because they have the power to crush any opposition; majority rule
is the dictatorial rule of the most numerous party, and the ruling
majority is not bound to restrain itself in the exercise of its power
and in the conduct of political affairs. As soon as a faction has
succeeded in winning the support of the majority of citizens and
thercby attained control of the government machine, it is free to
dcny to the minority all those democratic rights b y means of which
it itself has previously carried on its own struggle for supremacy.
This pseudo-liberalism is, of course, the very antithesis of the
liberal doctrine. T h e liberals do not maintain that majorities are
godlike and infallible; they do not contend that the merc fact that a
policy is advocated by the many is a proof of its merits for the common weal. T h e y do not rccornmend the dictatorship of the majority
and thc violcnt oppression of disscnting minorities. Liberalism aims
at a political constitution which safepards the smooth working of
social cooperation and the progressive intensification of mutual social relations. Its main objective is the avoidance of violent conflicts,
of wars and revolutions that must disintegrate the social collaboration of men and throw people back into the primitive conditions of
barbarism where all tribes and political bodies endlessly fought one
another. Because the division of labor requires undisturbed peace,
liberalism aims at the estabIishmcnt of a systcm of government that
is likely to preserve peace, viz., democracy.

Praxeology and Liberalism
Liberalism is a political doctrine. It is not a theory, but an appIication of
the theories developed by praxeology and especially by economics to definite problems of human action within society.

154

Human Action

As a political doctrine liberalism is not neutral with regard to values and
the ultimate ends sought by action. It assumes that all men or at least the
majority of people are intent upon attaining certain goals. It gives them
information about the means suitable to the realization of their plans. Tke
champions of liberal doctrines are fully aware of the fact that their teachings are valid only for people who are committed to these valuational
principles.
While praxeology, and therefore economics too, uses the terms happiness and removal of uneasiness in a purely formal sense, liberalisni attaches to them a concrete meaning. It presupposes that peopIe prefer life
to death, health to sickness, nourishment to starvation, abundance to
poverty. It teaches man how to act in accordance with these valuations.
It is customary to call these concerns ~naterialisticand to charge liberalism with an alleged crude materialism and a neglect of the "higher" and
"nobler" pursuits of mankind. Man does not live by bread alone, say the
critics, and they disparage the meanness and despicable baseness of the
utilitarian philosophy. However, thesc passionate diatribes are wrong because they badly distort the teachings of liberalism.
First: The liberals do not assert that men ought to strive after the goals
mentioned above. What they maintain is that the immense majority prefer
a life of health and abundance to misery, starvation, and death. T h e correctness of this statement cannot be challenged. It is proved by the fact
that all antiliberal doctrines-the theocratic tenets of the various religious,
statist, nationalist, and socialist parties-adopt the same attitude with regard to these issues. They all promise their followers a life of plenty. They
have never ventured to tell people that the realization of their program
will impair their material well-being. They insist-on the contrary-that
while the realization of the plans of their rival parties will resuIt in indigence for the majority, they themselves want to provide their supporters
with abundance. T h e Christian parties are no less eager in promising the
masses a higher standard of living than the nationalists and the socialists.
Present-day churches often speak more about raising wage rates and farm
incomes than about the dogmas of the Christian doctrine.
Secondly: The liberals do not disdain the intellectual and spiritual aspirations of man. On the contrary. They arc prompted by a passionate ardor
for intellectual and moral perfection, for wisdom and for aesthetic excellence. But their view of these high and noble things is far from the crude
representations of their adversaries. They do not share the na'ive opinion
that any system of social organization can directly succeed in encouraging
philosophical or scientific thinking, in producing masterpieces of art and
literature and in rendering the masses more enlightened. They realize
that all that society can achieve in these fields is to provide an environment
which does not put insurmountable obstacles in the way of the genius and
makes the common man free enough from material concerns to become interested in things other than mere breadwinning. In their opinion
the foremost social means of making man more human is to fight poverty.

Human Society

155

Wisdom and science and the arts thrive better in a world of aflluencc than
among needy peoples.
It is a purposeful distortion of facts to blame thc age of liberalism for
an alleged materialism. The nineteenth century was not only a century of
unprecedented improvement in technical methods of production and in
the material well-being of the masses. It did much more than extend the
average length of human life. Its scientific and artistic accomplishments
are imperishable. It was an age of immortal musicians, writers, poets,
painters, and sculptors; it revolutionized philosophy, economics, mathematics, physics, chemistry, and biology. And, for the first time in history,
it made the great works and the great thoughts accessible to the common
man.

Liberalism and Religion
Liberalism is based upon a purely rational and scientific theory of social
cooperation. The policies it recommends are the application of a system
of knowledge which does not refer in any way to sentiments, intuitive
creeds for which no logically sufficient proof can be provided, mystical
experiences, and the personal awareness of superhuman phenomena. In
this sense the often misunderstood and erroneously interpreted epithets
atheistic and agnostic can be attributed to it. It would, howeyer, be a
serious mistake to conclude that the sciences of human action and the
policy derived from their teachings, liberalism, are antitlleistic and hostile
to religion. They arc radically opposed to all systems of theocracy. But
they are entirely neutral with regard to religious beliefs which do not pretend to interfere with the conduct of social, political, and economic affairs.
Theocracy is a social system which lays claim to a superhuman title for
its legitimation. T h e fundamental law of a theocratic regime is an insight
not open to examination by reason and to demonstration by logical
methods. Its ultimate standard is intuition providing the mind with subjective certainty about things which cannot be conceived by reason and
ratiocination. If this intuition refers to one of the traditional systcms of
teaching concerning the existence of a Divine Creator and Ruler of the
universe, we call it a religious belief. If it refers to another system we call
it a metaphysical belief. Thus a system of theocratic government need not
be founded on one of the great historical reiigions of the worid. i t may
be the outcome of metaphysicaI tenets which reject all traditional churches
and denominations and take pride in emphasizing their antitheistic and
antimetaphysical character. In our time the most powerful theocratic
parties are opposed to Christianity and to all other religions which evolved
from Jewish monotheism. What characterizes them as theocratic is their
craving to organize the earthly affairs of mankind according to the contents of a complex of ideas whose validity cannot be demonstrated by
reasoning. They pretend that their leaders are blcssed by a knowledge inaccessible to the rest of mankind and contrary to the ideas maintained by
those to whom the charisma is denied. T h e charismatic leaders have been

156

Human Action

entrusted by a mystical higher power with the office of managing the
affairs of erring mankind. They alone are enlightened; all other people are
either blind and deaf or malefactors.
It is a fact that many varieties of the great historical religions were affected by theocratic tendencies. Their apostles were inspired by a craving
for power and the oppression and annihilation of all dissenting groups.
However, we must not confuse the two things, religion and theocracy.
William James calls religious "the feelings, acts and experiences of individual men in their solitude, so far as they apprehend themselves to
stand in relation to whatever they may consider the divine." He enumerates the following beliefs as the characteristics of the religious life: That
the visible world is part of a more spiritual universe from which it draws
its chief significance; that union or harnlonious relation with that higher
universe is our true end; that prayer or inner communion with the spirit
thereof-be that spirit "God" or "law"-is
a process wherein work is
really done, and spiritual energy flows in and produces effects, psychological or material, within the phenomena1 world. Religion, James goes on to
say, also includes the following psychological characteristics: A new zest
which adds itself like a gift to life, and takes the form either of lyrical
enchantment or of appeal to earnestness and heroism, and furthermore an
assurance of safety and a temper of peace, and, in relation to others, a preponderance of loving aff ection.6
This characterization of mankind's religious experience and feelings does
not make any reference to the arrangement of social cooperation. Religion,
as James sees it, is a purely personal and individual relation between man
and a holy, mystcrious, and awe-inspiring divine Reality. It enjoins upon
man a certain mode of individual conduct. But it does not assert anything
with regard to the problems of social organization. St. Francis d'Assisi, the
greatest religious genius of the West, did not concern himself with politics
and economics. H e wanted to teach his disciples how to live piously; he
did not draft a plan for the organization of production and did not urge
his followers to resort to violence against dissenters. He is not responsible
for the interpretation of his teachings by the order he founded.
Liberalism puts no obstacles in the way of a man eager to adjust his personal conduct and his private affairs according to the mode in which he
mdividually or his church or denomination interpret the teachings of the
Gospels. But it is radically opposed to all endeavors to silence the rational
discussion of problems of social welfare by an appeal to religious intuition
and revelation. It does not enjoin divorce or the practice of birth control
upon anybody. But it fights those who want to prevent other people from
freely discussing the pros and cons of these matters.
In the liberal opinion the aim of the moral law is to impel individuals to
adjust their conduct to the requirements of life in society, to abstain from
5. W. James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (35th impression, New
York, 19rj),p. 31.
6. Ibid., pp. 485-486.

Human Society

157

all acts detrimental to the preservation of peaceful social cooperation and
to the improvement of interhuman relations. They welcome the support
which religious teachings may give to those moral precepts of which they
themselves approve, but they are opposed to all those norms which are
bound to bring about social distintegration from whatever source they
may stem.
It is a distortion of fact to say, as many champions of religious theocracy
do, that liberalism fights religion. Where the principle of church interference with secular issues is in force, the various churches, denominations
and sects are fighting one another. By separating church and state, liberalism establishes peace between the various religious factions and gives to
each of them the opportunity to preach its gospel unmolested.
Liberalism is rationalistic. It maintains that it is possible to convince
the immense majority that peaceful cooperation within the framework of
society better serves their rightly understood interests than mutual
battling and social disintegration. It has full confidence in man's reason. It
may be that this optimism is unfounded and that the liberals have erred.
But then there is no hope left for mankind's future.

3. T h e Division of Labor
T h e fundamental social phenomenon is the division of labor and
its counterpart human cooperation.
Experience teaches man that cooperative action is more efficient
and productive than isolated action of self-sufficient individuals. T h e
natural conditions dcterrnining man's life and effort are such that the
division of labor increases output per unit of labor expended. These
naturaI facts are:
First: the innate inequality of men with regard to their ability t o
perform various kinds of labor. Second: the unequal distribution of
the nature-given, nonhuman opportunities of production on the surface of the earth. One may as well consider these t w o facts as one
and the samc fact, namely, the manifoIdness of nature which makes
the universe a compicx of infinite varieties. if the earth's surface were
such that the physical conditions of production were the same at every
point and if one man wcre as equal to all other men as is a circle to
another with the same diameter in Euclidian geometry, division of
labor would not offer any advantages for acting man.
There is still a third fhct, viz., that there are undertakings whose
accomplishment exceeds the forces of a single man and requires the
joint effort of several. Some of them require an expenditure of labor
which no single man can perform because his capacity to work is not
great enough. Others again could be accomplished b y individuals;

158

Human Action

but the time which they would have to devote to the work would
be so long that the result would only be attained late and would not
compensate for the labor expended. In borh cases only joint effort
makes it possible to attain the end sought.
If only this third condition were present, temporary cooperation
between men would have certainly emerged. However, such transient alliances to cope with specific tasks which are beyond the
strength of an individual would not have brought about lasting social
cooperation. Undertakings which could be performed only in this
way were not very numerous at the early stages of civilization. Alloreover, all those concerned may not often agree that the performance in
question is more useful and urgent than the accomplishment of other
tasks which they could perform alone. The great human society enclosing all men in all of their activities did not originate from such occasional alliances. Society is much more than a passing alliance concluded for a definite purpose and ceasing as soon as its objective is
realized, even if the partners are ready to renew it should an occasion
present itself.
?he increase in productivity brought about by the division of labor
is obvious whenever the inequality of the participants is such that
every individual or every piece of land is superior at least in one
regard to the other individuals or pieces of land concerned. If A is fit
to produce in I unit of time 6 p or 4 q and B only 2 p, but 8 q, they
both, when working in isolation, will produce together 4 p 6 q;
when working under the division of labor, each of them producing
only that comnlodity in whose production he is more efficient than
8 q. But what will happen, if A
his partner, they will produce 6 p
is more efficient than B not only in the production of p but also in the
production of q?
This is the problem which Ricardo raised and solved immediately.

+

+

4. T h e Ricardian Law of Association
Ricardo expounded the law of association in order to demonstrate
what the consequences of the division of labor are when an individual
or a group, more efficient in every regard, cooperates with an individual or a group less efficient in every regard. He investigated the
effects of trade between two areas, unequally endowed by nature,
under the assumption that the products, but not the workers and the
accumulated factors of future production (capita1 goods), can freely
move from each area into the other. The division of labor between two
such areas will, as Ricardo's law shows, increase the productivity of

Human Society

159

labor and is therefore advantageous to all concerned, even if the
physical conditions of production for any commodity are more
favorable in one of these two areas than in the other. It is advantageous for the better endowed area to concentrate its efforts upon the
production of those commodities for which its superiority is greater,
and to leave to the less endowed area the production of other goods in
which its own superiority is less. The paradox that it is more advantageous to leave more favorable domestic conditions of production unused and to procure the commodities they could produce from areas
in which conditions for their production are less favorable, is the outcome of the immobility of labor and capital, to which the more favorable places of production are inaccessible.
Ricardo was fully aware of the fact that his law of comparative
cost, which he expounded mainly in order to deal with a special problem of international trade, is a particular instance of the more universal law of association.
If A is in such a way more efficient than B that he needs for the
production of r unit of the commodity p 3 hours compared with B's
5, and for the production of I unit of q 2 hours compared with B's
4, then both will gain if A confines himself to producing q and leaves
B to produce p. If each of them gives 60 hours to producing p and 60
3 0 q; of B7s,
hours to producing q, the result of A's labor is zo p
I2 p
I 5 q; and for both together, 32 p
4 5 q. If, however, A confines himself to producing q alone, he produces 60 q in 1 2 0 hours,
while B, if he confines himself to producing p, produces in the same
60 q, which, asp
time 2 4 p. The result of their activities is then 2 4 p
5 signifies a
has for A a substitution ratio of 3 q and for B one of -q,

+

+

+

+

+

2

4

larger output than 3 2 p
4 5 q. Therefore it is rnanifest'that the division of labor brings advantages to all who take part in it. Collaboration
of the more talented, more able, and more industrious with the less
talented, less able, and less industrious results in benefit for both. The
gains derived from the division of iabor are aiways mutuai.
The law of association makes us comprehend the tendencies which
resulted in the progressive intensification of human cooperation. W e
conceive what incentive induced people not to consider themselves
simply as rivals in a struggle for the appropriation of the limited supply
of means of subsistence made available by nature. W e realize what
has impelled them and permanently impels them to consort with
one another for the sake of cooperation. Every step forward on the
way to a more developed mode of the division of labor serves the
interests of all participants. In order to comprehend why man did not

I 60

Human Action

remain solitary, searching like the animals for food and shelter for
himself only and at most also for his consort and his helpless infants,
we do not need to have recourse to a miraculous interference of the
Deity or to the empty hypostasis of an innate urge toward association. Neither are we forced to assume that the isolated individuals or
primitive hordes one day pledged themselves by a contract to establish social bonds. T h e factor that brought about primitive society
and daily works toward its progressive intensification is human action
that is & h a t e d by the insight into the higher productivity of labor
achieved under the division of labor.
Neither history nor ethnology nor any other branch of knowledge can provide a description of the evolution which has led from
the packs and flocks of mankind's nonhuman ancestors to the primitive, yet already highly differentiated, societal groups about which
information is provided in excavations, in the most ancient documents
of history, and in the reports of explorers and travelers who have met
savage tribes. The task with which science is faced in respect of the
origins of society can only consist in the demonstration of those
factors which can and must result in association and its progressive
intensification. Praxeology solves the problem. If and as far as labor
under the division of labor is more productive than isolated labor, and
if and as far as man is able to realize this fact, human action itself
tends toward cooperation and association; man becomes a social being not in sacrificing his own concerns for the sake of a mythical
Moloch, society, but in aiming at an improvement in his own welfare. Experience teaches that this condition-higher
productivity
achieved under the division of labor-is present because its cause-the
inborn inequality of men and the inequality in the geographica1 distribution of the natural factors of production-is real. Thus we are in
a position to comprehend the course of social evolution.

People cavil much about Ricardo's law of association, better known
under the name law of comparative cost. The reason is obvious. This law
is an offense to all those eager to justify protection and nationaI economic
isolation from any point of view other than the selfish interests of some
producers or the issues of war-preparedness.
Ricardo's first aim in expounding this law was to refute an objection
raised against freedom of international trade. The protectionist asks: What
under free trade will be the fate of a country in which the conditions for
any kind of production are less favorable than in all other countries? Now,
in a world in which there is free mobility not only for products, but no

H'uman Society

I6I

less for capital goods and for labor, a country so little suited for production would cease to be used as the seat of any human industry. If people
fare better without exploiting the-comparatively unsatisfactory-physical conditions of production offered by this country, they will not settle
here and will leave it as uninhabited as the polar regions, the tundras and
the deserts. But Ricardo deals with a world whose conditions are determined by settlement in earlier days, a world in which capital goods and
labor are bound to thc soil by definite institutions. In such a milieu free
trade, i.e., the free mobility of commodities only, cannot bring about a
state of affairs in which capital and labor are distributed on the surface of
the earth according to the better or poorer physical opportunities afforded
to the productivity of labor. Here the law of comparative cost comes into
operation. Each country turns toward those branches of production for
which its conditions offer comparatively, although not absolutely, the
most favorable opportunities. For the inhabitants of a country it is more
advantageous to abstain from the exploitation of some opportunities which
-absolutely and technologically-are more propitious and to import cornmodities produced abroad under conditions which-absolutely and technologically-are less favorable than the unused domestic resources. The
case is analogous to that of a surgeon who finds it convenient to employ for
the cleaning of the operating-room and the instruments a man whom he
excels in this performance also and to devote himself exclusively to surgery,
in which his superiority is higher.
The theorem of comparative cost is in no way connected with the value
theory of classical economics. It does not deal with value or with prices.
It is an analytic judgment; the conclusion is implied in the two propositions
that the technicaIly movable factors of production differ with regard to
their productivity in various places and are institutionally restricted in
their mobility. The theorem, without prejudice to the correctness of its
conclusions, can disregard problems of valuation because it is free to resort to a set of simple assumptions. These are: that only two products are
t o be produced; that these products are freely movable; that for the production of each of them two factors are required; that one of these factors
(it may be either labor or capital goods) is identical in the production of
both, while the other factor (a specific property of the soil) is different
for each of the two proccsscs, that the greatcr scarcity irf the factor coinmon to both processes determines the extent of the exploitation of the different factor. In the frame of these assumptions, which makc it possible
to establish substitution ratios between the expenditure of the common
factor and the output, the theorem answers the question raised.
The law of comparative cost is as independent of the classical theory of
value as is the law of returns, which its reasoning resembles. In both cases
we can content ourselves with comparing only physical input and physical
output. With the law of returns we compare the output of the same product. With the law of comparative costs we compare the output of two
different products. Such a comparison is feasible because we assume that

I 62

Human Action

for the production of each of them, apart from one specific factor, only
nonspecific factors of the same kind arc required.
Some critics blame the law of comparative cost for this simplification
of assumptions. They believe that the modern theory of value would rcquire a reformulation of the law in conformity with the principles of
subjective value. Only such a formulation could provide a satisfactory conclusive demonstration. Howevcr, they do not want to calculate in terms
of money. They prefer to resort to those methods of utility analysis which
they consider a means for making value calculations in terms of utility. It
will be shown in thc further progress of our investigation that these attempts to eliminate monetary terms from economic calculation are delusive. Their fundamental assumptions are untenable and contradictory and
all formulas derived from them are vicious. No method of economic calcuiation is possible other than onc based on money prices as determined by
the market.?
The meaning of the simple assun~ptionsunderlying the law of comparative cost is not precisely the same for the modern economists as it was
for the classical economists. Some adherents of the classical school considered them as the starting point of a theory of value in international
trade. W e know now that they were mistaken in this belief. Besides, we
realize that with regard to the determination of value and of prices there
is no difference between domestic and foreign trade. What makes people
distinguish between the home market and markets abroad is only a difference in the data, LC., varying institutional conditions restricting thc
mobility of factors of production and of products.
If we do not want to deal with the law of comparative cost under the
simplified assumptions applied by Ricardo, we must openly employ money
calculation. W e must not fall prey to the illusion that a comparison between the expenditure of factors of production of various kinds and of the
output of products of various kinds can be achieved without the aid of
money calculation. If we consider the case of the surgeon and his handyman
we must say: If the surgeon can employ his limited working time for the
performance of operations for which he is compensated at $50 per hour,
it is t o his interest to employ a handyman to keep his instruments in good
order and to pay him $2 per hour, although this man needs 3 hours to accomplish what the surgeon could do in I hour. In comparing the conditions
of two countries we must say: If conditions are such that in England the
production of I unit of each of the two commodities a and b requires the
expenditure of I working day of the same kind of labor, while in India
with the same investment of capital for a 2 days and for b 3 days are required, and if capital goods and n and b are freely movable from England
to India and vice versa, while there is no mobility of labor, wage rates in
India in the production of a must tend to be 50 per cent, and in the production of b 3 3 Yi?per cent, of the English rates. If the English rate is 6 shillings,
the rates in India would be the equivalent of 3 shillings in the production
7. See below, pp. 202-210.

Human Society

163

of n and the equivalent of 2 shillings in the production of b. Such a discrepancy in the remuneration of labor of the same kind cannot last if
there is mobility of labor on the domestic Indian labor market. Workers
would shift from the production of b into the production of a; their migration would tend to lower the remuneration in the a industry and to raise
it in the b industry. Finally Indian wage rates would be equal in both industries. The production of a would tend to expand and to supplant English
competition. On the other hand the production of b would become unprofitable in India and would have to be discontinued, while it would expand in England. The same reasoning is valid if we assume that the difference in the conditions of production consists also or exclusively in the
amount of capital investment needed.
It has been asserted that Ricardo's law was valid only for his age and is
of no avail for our time which offers other conditions. Ricardo saw the difference between domestic trade and foreign trade in differences in the
mobility of capital and labor. If one assumes that capital, labor, and products are movable, then there exists a difference between regional and
interregional trade only as far as the cost of transportation comes into play.
Then it is superfluous to develop a theory of international trade as distinguished from national trade. Capital and labor are distributed on the
earth's surface according to the better or poorer conditions which the
various regions offer to production. There are areas more densely populated and bctter equipped with capital, there are others less densely populated and poorer in capital supply. There prcvails on the whole earth a
tendency toward an equalization of wage rates for the same kind of labor.
Ricardo, however, starts from the assumption that there is mobility of
capital and labor only within each country, and not between the various
countries. H e raises the question what the consequences of the free mobility of products must be under such conditions. (If there is no mobility of
products either, then every country is econon~icallyisolated and autarkic,
and there is no international trade at all.) The theory of comparative cost
answers this question. Now, Ricardo's assumptions by and large held good
for his age. Later, in the course of the nineteenth century, conditions
changed. The immobility of capital and labor gave way; international
transfer of capital and labor became more and more common. Then came
a reaction. Today capital and labor are again restricted in their mobility.
Reality again corresponds to the Ricardian assumptions.
However, the teachings of the classical theory of interregional trade
are above any change in institutional conditions. They enable us to study
the problems involved under any imaginable assumptions.

5. T h e Effects of t h e Division of Labor
T h e division of Iabor is the outcome of man's conscious reaction t o
the multiplicity of natural conditions. On the other hand it is itself
a factor bringing about differentiation. I t assigns to the various geo-

Human Action
graphic areas specific functions in the complex of the processes of
production. It makes some areas urban, others rural; it locates the
various branches of manufacturing, mining, and agriculture in different places. Still more important, however, is the fact that it intensifies the innate inequality of men. Exercise and practice of specific
tasks adjust individuals better to the requirements of their performance; men develop some of their inborn faculties and stunt the development of others. Vocational types emerge, people become specialists.
T h e division of labor splits the various processes of production
into minute tasks, many of which can be performed by mechanical
devices. It is this fact that made the use of machinery possible and
brought about the amazing improvements in technical methods of
production. Mechanization is the fruit of the division of labor, its
most beneficial achievement, not its motive and fountain spring.
Power-driven specialized machinery could be employed only in a
social environment under the division of labor. Every step forward
on the road toward the use of more specialized, more refined, and
more productive machines requires a further specialization of tasks.

6. T h e Individual W i t h i n Society
If praxeology speaks of the solitary individual, acting on his own
behalf only and independent of fellow men, it does so for the sake of
a better comprehension of the problems of social cooperation. W e
do not assert that such isolated autarkic human beings have ever lived
and that the social stage of man's history was preceded by an age of
independent individuals roaming like animals in search of food. The
biological humanization of man's nonhuman ancestors and the emergence of the primitive social bonds were effected in the same process.
Man appeared on the scene of earthly events as a social being. The
isolated asocial man is a fictitious construction.
Seen from the point of view of the individual, society is the great
means for the attainment of all his ends, T h e preservation of society
is an essential condition of any plans an individual may want to
realize by any action whatever. Evcn the refractory delinquent who
fails to adjust his conduct to the requirements of life within the
societal system of cooperation does not want to miss any of the advantages derived from the division of labor. H e does not consciously aim
at the destruction of society. H e wants to lay his hands on a greater
portion of the jointly produced wealth than the social order assigns
to him. H e would feel miserable if antisocial behavior were to become universal and its inevitable outcome, the return to primitive
indigence, resulted.

Human Society

I 6j

It is illusory to maintain that individuals in renouncing the alleged
blcssiags of a fabulous state of nature and entering into society have
foregone some advantages and have a fair claim to be indemnified for
what they have lost. The idea that anybody would have fared better
under an asocial state of mankind and is wronged by the very existence of society is absurd. Thanks to the higher productivity of social
cooperation the human species has multiplied far beyond the margin
of subsistence offered by the conditions prevailing in ages with a
rudimentary degree of the division of labor. Each man enjoys a
standard of living much higher than that of his savage ancestors. The
natural condition of man is extreme poverty and insecurity. It is
romantic nonsense to lament the passing of the happy days of primitive barbarism. In a state of savagery the complainants would either
not have reached the age of manhood, or if they had, they would
have lacked the opportunities and amenities provided by civilization.
Jean Jacques Rousseau and Frederick Engels, if they had lived in the
primitive state which they describe with nostalgic yearning, would
not have enjoyed the leisure required for their studies and for the
writing of their books.
Onc of the privileges which society affords to the individual is
the privilege of living in spite of sickness or physicaI disability. Sick
animals are doomed. Their weakness handicaps them in their attempts to find food and to repel aggression on the part of other animals. Deaf, nearsighted, or crippled savages must perish. But such
defects do not deprive a man of the opportunity to adjust himself to
life in socicty. T h e majority of our contemporaries are afflicted with
some bodily deficiencies which biology considers pathological. Our
civilization is to a great extent the achievement of such men. The
eliminative forces of natural selection are greatly reduced under
social conditions. Hence some people say that civilization tends to
deteriorate the hereditary qualities of the members of society.
Such judgments are reasonable if one looks at mankind with the
eyes of a breeder intent upon raising a race of men equipped with
certain qualities. But society is not a stud-farm operated for the
production of a definite type of men. There is no "natural" standard
to establish what is desirable and what is undesirable in the biological
evolution of man. Any standard chosen is arbitrary, purely subjective,
in short a judgment of value. T h e terms racial improvement and racial
degeneration are meaningless when not based on definite plans for the
future of mankind.
It is true, civiIized man is adjusted to life in society and not to that
of a hunter in virgin forests.

I 66

Human Action
The Fable of the Mystic Communion

The praxeological theory of society is assailed by the fable of the mystic
communion.
Society, assert the supporters of this doctrine, is not the product of man's
purposeful action; it is not cooperation and division of tasks. It stems from
unfathomable depths, from an urge ingrained in man's essential nature. It
is, says one group, engrossment by the Spirit which is Divine Reality and
participation, by virtue of a unio mystica, in God's power and love. Another group sees society as a biological phenomenon; it is the work of the
voice of the blood, the bond uniting the offspring of common ancestors
with these ancestors and with one another, and the mystical harmony between the ploughman and the soil he tilIs.
That such psychical phenomena are really felt is true. There are people
who experience the unio mystica and place this experience above everything else, and there are men who are convinced that they hear the voice
of the bIood and smell with heart and sou1the unique scent of the cherished
soil of their country. The mystical experience and the ecstatic rapture are
facts which psychology must consider real, like any other psychical
phenomenon. The error of the communion-doctrines does not consist in
their assertion that such phenomena really occur, but in the belief that they
are primary facts not dependent on any rational consideration.
The voice of the blood which brings the father close to his child was not
heard by those savages who did not know the causal relation benvcen
cohabitation and pregnancy. Today, as this relation is known to everybody, a man who has full confidence in his wife's fidelity may perceive it.
But if there are doubts concerning the wife's fidelity, the voice of the blood
is of no use. hTobody ever ventured to assert that doubts concerning
paternity could be resolved by the voice of the blood. A mother who has
kept watch over her child since its birth can hear the voice of the blood. If
she loses touch with the infant at an early date, she may later identify it
by some bodily marks, for instance those moles and scars which once were
popular with novel writers. But thc blood is mute if such observations and
the conclusions derived from them do not make it speak. The voice of the
blood, contend the German racists, mysteriously unifies all members of
the German people. But anthropology reveals the fact that the German
nation is a mixture of the descendants of various races, subraces, and strains
and not a homogeneous stock descended from a common ancestry. The
recently germanized Slav who has only a short time since changed his
paternal family name for a German-sounding name believes that he is substantially attached to all Germans. But he does not experience any such
inner urge impelling him to join the ranks of his brothers or cousins who
remained Czechs or Poles.
The voice of the blood is not an original and primordial phenomenon.
It is prompted by rational considerations. Because a man believes that he is
related to other people by a common ancestry, he develops those feelings

Hzmun Society
and sentiments which are poetically described as the voice of the blood.
The same is true with regard to religious ecstasy and mysticism of the
soil. The unio mystica of the devout mystic is conditioned by familiarity
with the basic teachings of his religion. Only a man who has learned about
the greatness and glory of God can experience direct communion with
Him. Mysticism of the soil is connected with the development of definite
geopolitical ideas. Thus it may happen that inhabitants of the plains or the
seashore include in the image of the soil with which they claim to be fervently joined and united, mountain districts which are unfamiliar to them
and to whose conditions they could not adapt themselves, only because
this territory belongs to the political body of which they are members, or
would like to be members. On the other hand they often fail to include in
this image of the soil whose voice they claim to hear, neighboring areas of
a geographic structure very similar t o that of their own country if these
areas happen to belong to a foreign nation.
The various members of a nation or linguistic group and the clusters they
form are not always united in friendship and good will. The history of
every nation is a record of mutual dislike and even hatred between its subdivisions. Think of the English and the Scotch, the Yankees and the
Southerners, the Prussians and the Bavarians. It was ideologies that overcame such animosities and inspired all members of a nation or linguistic
group with those feelings of community and belonging together which
present-day nationalists consider a natural and original phenomenon.
The mutual sexual attraction of male and female is inherent in man's
animal nature and independent of any thinking and theorizing. It is permissible to call it original, vegetative, instinctive, or mysterious; there is no
harm in asserting metaphorically that it makes one being out of two. W e
may call it a mystic communion of two bodies, a community. However,
neither cohabitation, nor what precedes it and follows, generates social
cooperation and societal modes of life. The animals too join together in
mating, but they have not developed social relations. Family life is not
merely a product of sexual intercourse. It is by no means natural and
necessary that parents and children live togethcr in the way in which they
do in the family. The mating relation need not result in a family organization. The human family is an outcome of thinking, planning, and acting.
It is this very fact which distinguishes it radically from those animal
groups which we call per analogiam animal families.
The mystical experience of communion or community is not the source
of societal relations, but their product.
The counterpart of the fable of the mystical communion is the fable of
a natural and original repulsion between races or nations. It is asserted that
an instinct teaches man to distinguish congeners from strangers and to detest the latter. Scions of noble races abominate any contact with members
of lower races. T o refute this statement one need only mention the fact of
racial mixture. As there are in present-day Europe no pure stocks, we must
conclude that between members of the various stocks which once settled

I 68

Human Action

in that continent there was sexual attraction and not repulsion. Millions
of mulattoes and other half-breeds are living counterevidence to the assertion that there exists a natural repulsion between the various races.
Like the mystical sense of communion, racial hatred is not a natural
phenomenon innate in man. It is the product of ideologies. But even if such
a thing as a natural and inborn hatred between various races existed, it
would not render social cooperation futile and would not invalidate
Ricardo's theory of association. Social cooperation has nothing to do with
personal love or with a general commandment to love one another. Pcople
do not cooperate under the division of labor because they love or should
love one another. They cooperate because this best serves their own interests. Neither love nor charity nor any other sympathetic sentiments but
rightly understood selfishness is what originally impelled man to adjust
himself to the requirements of society, to respect the rights and freedoms
of his fellow men and to substitute peaceful collaboration for enmity and
conflict.

7. The G r e a t Society
N o t every interhuman relation is a social relation. W h e n groups
of men rush upon one another in a war of outright extermination,
when men fight against men as mercilessly as thcy crush pernicious
animals and plants, there is, between the fightina arties, reciprocal
P
effect and mutual relation, but n o society. Society 1s joint action and
cooperation in which each participant sees the other partner's success
as a means for the attainment of his own.
T h e struggles in which primitive hordes and tribes fought one another for watering places, hunting and fishing grounds, pastures and
booty were such pitiless wars of annihilation. T h e y were total wars.
So in the nineteenth century were the first encounters of Europeans
with the aborigines of territories newly made accessible. But already in the primeval age, long before the time of which historical
records convey information, another mode of procedure began to
develop. People preserved even in warfare some rudiments of social
relations previously established; in fighting against peoples with
whom they never before had had any contact, they began t o take
into account the idea that between human beings, notwithstanding
their immediate enmity, a later arrangement and cooperation is possible. Wars were waged t o hurt the foe; but the hostile acts were no
longer merciless and pitiless in the full sense of these terms. T h e
belligerents began to respect certain limits which in a struggle against
men-as differentiated from that against beasts-should not be transcended. Above the implacable hatred and the frenzy of destruction
and annihilation a societal element began to prevail. T h e idea emerged

.

Hu7nan Society

169

that every human adversary should be considered as a potential
partner in a future cooperation, and that this fact should not be
neglected in the conduct of military operations. War was no longer
considered the norma1 state of interhuman relations. People recognized that pcaceful cooperation is the best means to carry on the struggle for biological survival. W e may even say that as soon as people
realized that it is more advantageous to enslave the defeated than to
kill them, the warriors, while still fighting, gave thought to the aftermath, the peace. Enslavement was by and large a preliminary step
toward cooperation.
The ascendancy of the idea that even in war not every act is to be
considered permissible, that there are legitimatc and illicit acts of
warfare, that there are laws, i.e., societal relationships which are
above a11 nations, cvcn above those momentarily fighting one another,
has finally established the Great Society embracing all men and all
nations. The various regional societies were merged into one ecumenical society.
Belligerents who do not wage war savagely in the manner of
beasts, but according to "human" and social rules of warfare, renounce the use of some methods of destruction in order to attain the
same concessions on the part of thcir foes. As far as such rules are
complied with, social relations exist between the fighting parties. The
hostile acts themselves are not only asocial, but antisocial. It is a
mistake to define the term "social relationships" in such a way as to
incIude actions which aim at other people's annihiIation and at the
frustration of their a c t i ~ n s . ~
Where the only relations between men
are those directed at mutual detriment, there is neither society nor
societal relations.
Society is not merely interaction. There is interaction-reciprocal
influence-between all parts of the universe: between the wolf and
the sheep he devours; between the germ and the man it kills; between
the falling stone and the thing upon which it falls. Society, on the
other hand, always involves men acting in cooperation with other
men in order to let all participants attain their own ends.

8. The Instinct of Aggression and Destruction
It has been asserted that man is a bcast of prey whose inborn
natural instincts impel him to fight, to kill, and to destroy. Civilization, in creating unnatural humanitarian laxity which alienates man
8. Such is the terminology used by Leapold von Wiese (Allgemeine Sodologie
[Munich, 19241,I, 10ff.).

170

Human Action

from his animal origin, has tried to quell these impulses and appetites.
I t has made civilized man a decadent weakling who is ashamed of
his animality and proudly calls his depravity true humaneness. In
order to prevent further degeneration of the species man, it is imperative to free him from the pcrnicious effects of civilization. For
civilization is merely a cunning invention of inferior men. These
underlings are too weak to be a match for the vigorous heroes, they
are too cowardly to endure the well-deserved punishment of complete annihilation, and they are too lazy and too insolent to serve the
masters as slaves. Thus they have resorted to a tricky makeshift. They
have reversed the eternal standards of value, absolutely fixed by the
immutable laws of the universe; they have propagated a morality
which calls their own inferiority virtue and the eminence of the
noble heroes vice. This moral retkllion of the slaves niust be undone
by a transvaluation of all values. T h e ethics of the slaves, this shameful
product of the resentment of weaklings, must he entirely discarded;
the ethics of the strong or, properly speaking, the nullification of
any ethical restriction niust be substituted for it. Man must become
a worthy scion of his ancestors, the noble beasts of days gone by.
It is usual to call such doctrines social or sociological Darwinism.
W e need not decide here whether this terminology is appropriate
or not. At any rate it is a mistake to assign the epithets evolutionary
and biological to teachings which blithely disparage the whole of
mankind's history from the ages in which man began to lift himself
above the purely animal existence of his nonhuman ancestors as a
continuous progression toward degeneration and decay. Biology does
not provide any standard for the appraisal of changes occurring
within living beings other than whether or not these changes succeeded in adjusting the individuals to the conditions of their environment and thercby in improving their chances in the struggle for
survival. It is a fact that civilization, when judged from this point of
view, is to be considered a benefit and not an evil. I t has enabled man
to hold his own in the struggle against all other living beings, both the
big beasts of prey and the even more pernicious microbes; it has multiplied man's means of sustenance; it has made the average man taller,
more agile, and more versatile and it has stretched his average length
of life; it has given man the uncontested mastery of the earth; it
has multiplied population figures and raised the standard of living to
a lcvcl ncver dreamed of b y the crude cave dwellers of prehistoric
ages. I t is true that this evolution stunted the development of certain
knacks and gifts which were once uscful in the struggle for survival
and have lost their usefulness under changed conditions. On the other

Human Society

171

hand it developed other talents and skills which are indispensabIe
for life within the frame of society. However, a biological and evolutionary view must not cavil at such changes. For primitive man
hard fists and pugnacity were as useful as the ability to be clever at
arithmetic and to spell correctly are for modern man. It is quite
arbitrary and certainly contrary to any biological standard to call
only those characteristics which were useful to primitive man natural
and adequate to human nature and to condemn the talents and skills
badly needed by civilized man as marks of degeneration and biological deterioration. T o advise man to return to the physical and
intellectual features of his prehistoric ancestors is no more reasonable
than to ask him to renounce his upright gait and to grow a tail again.
I t is noteworthy that the men who were foremost in extolling the
eminence of the savage impulses of our barbarian forefathers were so
frail that their bodies would not have come up to the requirements of
"dangerous living." bTietzscheeven before his mental breakdown was
so sickly that the only climate he could stand was that of the Engadin
valley and of some Italian districts. H e would not have been in a
position to accomplish his work if civilized society had not protected his delicate nerves against the roughness of life. T h e apostles
of violence wrote their books undcr the sheltering roof of "bourgeois
security" which they derided and disparaged. They were free to publish their incendiary sermons because the liberalism which they
scorned safeguarded freedom of the press. They would have been
desperate if they had had t o forego the blessinis of the civilization
scorned by their philosophy. And what a spectacle was that timid
writer Gcorges Sorel, who went so far in his praise of brutality as to
blame the modern system of education for weakening man's inborn
tendencies toward violence! "
One may admit that in primitive man the propensity for killing and
destroying and the disposition for cruelty were innate. W e may also
assume that under the conditions of earlier ases the inclination for
aggression and murder was favorable to the preservation of life. Man
was once a brutal beast. (There is no need to investigate whether prehistoric man was a carnivore or a herbivore.) But one must not forget that he was physicaHy a weak animal; he would not have been a
match for the big beasts of prey if he had not been equipped with a
peculiar weapon, reason. T h e fact that man is a reasonable being, that
he therefore does not yield without inhibitions to every impulse, but
arranges his conduct according to reasonable deliberation, must not
be called unnatural from a zoologicaI point of view. Rational conduct
9. Georges Sorel. Kiflexions sur la violence (3d ed., Paris, r912), p. 269.

172

Human Action

means that man, in face of the fact that he cannot satisfy all his impulses, desires, and appetites, foregoes the satisfaction of those which
he considers less urgent. In order not to endanger the working of
social cooperation man is forced to abstain from satisfying those desires whose satisfaction would hinder establishment of societal institutions. There is no doubt that such a renunciation is painful. However, man has made his choice. H e has renounced the satisfaction of
some desires incompatible with social life and has given priority to the
satisfaction of those desires which can be realized only or in a morc
plentiful way under a system of the division of labor. He has entered
upon the way toward civilization, social cooperation, and wealth.
This decision is not irrevocable and final. The choice of the fathers
does not impair the sons' freedom to choose. They can reverse the
resolution. Every day they can proceed to the transvaluation of values
and prefer barbarism to civilization. or, as some authors say, the
soul to the intellect, myths to reason, and violence to peace. But they
must choose. I t is impossible to have things incompatible with one
another.
Science, from the point of view of its valuational neutrality, does
not blame the apostles of the gospel of violence for praising the
frenzy of murder and the mad delights of sadism. VaIue judgments
are subjective, and liberal society grants to everybody the right to
express his sentiments freely. Civilization has not extirpated the original tendency toward aggression, bloodthirstiness, and cruelty which
characterized primitive man. In many civilized men they are dormant
and burst forth as soon as the restraints developed by civilization give
way. Remember the unspeakable horrors of the Nazi concentration
camps. The newspapers continually report abominable crimes
manifesting the latent urges toward bestiality. The most popular
novels and moving pictures are those dealing with bloodshed and
violent acts. Bull fights and cock fights attract large crowds.
If an author says: the rabble thirst for blood and I with them, he
may be no less right than in asserting that primitive man too took
delight in killing. But he errs if he passes over the fact that the satisfaction of such sadistic desires impairs the existence of society or if
hc asserts that "true" civilization and the "good" society are an
achievement of people blithely indulging in their passion for violence,
murder, and cruelty, that the repression of the impulses toward brutality endangers mankind's evolution and that a substitution of barbarism for humanitarianism would save man from degeneration. The
social division of labor and cooperation rests upon conciliatory settlement of disputes. Not war, as Heraclitus said, but peace is the

Human Society
source of all socia1 relations. T o man desires other than that for bloodshed are inborn. If he wants to satisfy these other desires, he must
forego his urge to kill. H e who wants to preserve life and health as
well and as long as possible, must realize that respect for other people's
lives and health better serves his aim than the opposite mode of conduct. One may regret that such is the state of affairs. But no such
lamentations can alter the hard facts.
It is useless to censure this statement by referring to irrationality.
All instinctive impulses defy examination by reason because reason
deals only with the means for attaining ends sought and not with ultimate ends. But what distinguishes man from other animals is precisely
that he does not yield without any will of his own to an instinctive
urge. Man uses reason in order to choose between the incompatible
satisfactions of conflicting desires.
One must not tell the masses: Indulge in your urge for murder; it
is genuinely human and best serves your well-being. One must tell
them: If you satisfy your thirst for blood, you must forego many
other desires. You want to eat, to drink, to live in fine homes, to clothe
yourselves, and a thousand other things which only society can
provide. You cannot have everything, you must choose. The dangerous life and the frenzy of sadism may please you, but they are incompatible with the security and plenty which you do not want to
miss either.
Praxeology as a science cannot encroach upon the individual's right
to choose and to act. T h e final decisions rest with acting men, not
with the theorists. Science's contribution to life and action does not
consist in establishing vaIue judgments, but in clarification of the
conditions under which man must act and in elucidation of the effects
of various modes of action. It puts at the disposal of acting man all
the information he needs in order to make his choices in full awareness of their consequences. I t prepares an estimate of cost and yield, as
it were. It would fail in this task if it were to omit from this statement one of the items which could be of influence in people's choices
and decisions.

Current .Misinterpretations of Modern Natural
Science, Especially of Darcinism
Some present-day antiliberals, both of the right-wing and of the leftwing variety, base their teachings on misinterpretations of the achievements of modern biology.
I. Men are unequal. Eighteenth-century liberalism and likewise presentday egalitarianism start from the "self-evident truth" that "all men are

I74

Human Action

created equal, and that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights." However, say the advocates of a biological philosophy
of society, natural science has demonstrated in an irrefutable way that men
are different. There is no room left in the framework of an experimental
observation of natural phenomena for such a concept as natural rights.
Nature is unfeeling and insensible with regard to any being's life and happiness. h-ature is iron necessity and regularity. It is metaphysical nonsense to
link together the "slippery" and vague notion of liberty and the unchangeable absolute laws of cosmic order. Thus the fundamental idea of liberalism
is unmasked as a fallacy.
Now it is true that the liberal and democratic movement of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries drew a great part of its strength from the
doctrine of natural law and the innate imprescriptible rights of the individual. These ideas, first developed by ancient philosophy and Jewish
theology, permeated Christian thinking. Some anti-Catholic sects made
them the focal point of their political programs. A long line of eminent
philosophers substantiated them. They became popular and were the most
powerful moving force in the prodemocratic evolution. They are still supported today. Their advocates do not concern themselves with the incontestable fact that God or nature did not create men equal since many are
born hale and hearty while others are crippled and deformed. With them
all differences between men are due to education, opportunity, and socia!
institutions.
But the teachings of utilitarian philosophy and cIassical economics have
nothing at all to do with the doctrine of natural right. With them the only
point that matters is social utility. They recommend popular government,
private property, tolerance, and freedom not because they are natural and
just, but because they are beneficial. T h e core of Ricardo's philosophy is
the demonstration that social cooperation and division of labor between
men who are in every regard superior and more efficient and men who are
in every regard inferior and less efficient is beneficial to both groups.
Bentharn, the radical, shouted: "Natural rights is simple nonsense: natural
and imprescriptible rights, rhetorical nonsense." l o With him "the sole
object of government ought to be the greatest happiness of the greatest
possible number of the community." l1 Accordingly, in investigating what
ought to be right he does not care about preconceived ideas concerning
God's or nature's plans and intentions, forever hidden to mortal men; he
is intent upon discovering what best serves the promotion of human welfare and happiness. Malthus showed that nature in limiting the means of
subsistence does not accord to any living being a right of existence, and
that by indulging heedlessly in the natural impulse of proliferation man
would never have risen above the verge of starvation. H e contended that
human civilization and weI1-being could develop only to the extent that
10. Bentharn, Anarchical Fallacies; being an Examination of the Declaration of
Rights issued during the French Revolution, in Works (ed. by Bowring), 11, $01.
I I. Bentham, Principles of the Civil Code, in Works, I , 301.

Human Society

175

man learned to rein his sexuaI appetites b y moral restraint. The Utilitarians
d o not combat arbitrary government and privileges because they arc
against natural law but because they are detrimental to prosperity. T h e y
recommend equality under the civil law not because men are equal but because such a policy is beneficial to the commonweal. In rejecting the illusory notions of natural law and human equality modern biology only repeated what the utilitarian champions of liberalism and democracy long
before had taught in a much more persuasive way. It is obvious that no
biological doctrine can ever invalidate what utilitarian philosophy says
about the social utility of democratic government, private property, freedom, and equality under the law.
T h e present-day prevalence of doctrices approving social disintegration
and violent conflict is not the result of an alleged adaptation of social philosophy to the findings of biology but of the almost universal rejection of
utilitarian philosophy and economic theory. People have substituted an
ideoIogy of irreconcilable class conflict and international conflict for the
"orthodox" ideology of the harmony of the rightly understood, ix., longrun, interests of all individuals, social groups, and nations. Afen are fighting one another because they are convinced that the extermination and
liquidation of adversaries is the only means of promoting their own wellbeing.
2. T h e social implications of Darwinism. T h e theory of evolution as
expounded by Darwin, says a school of social Darwinism, has clearly demonstrated that in nature there are no such things as peace and respect for
the lives and welfare of others. In nature there is always struggle and
merciless annihilation of the weak who do not succeed in defending themselves. Liberalism's plans for eternal peace-both in domestic and in foreign relations-are :he outcome of an illusory rationalis~ncontrary to the
natural order.
However, the notion of the struggle for existence as Darwin borrowed it
from Malthus and applied it in his theory, is to be understood in a metaphorical sense. Its meaning is that a living being actively resists the forces
detrimental to its own life. This resistance, if it is to succeed, must be appropriate to the environmental conditions in which the being concerned
has to hold its own. It need not always be a war of extermination such as in
rhe reiarions between men and morbific microbes. Reason has demonstrated that, for man, the most adequate means of improving his condition
is social cooperation and division of labor. T h e y are man's foremost tool
in his struggle for survival. But they can work only where there is peace.
Wars, civil wars, and revolutions are detrinlental t o man's success in the
struggle for existence because they disintegrate the apparatus of social
cooperation.
3. Reason and rational behavior are unnatural. Christian theology deprecated the animal functions of man's body and depicted the "soul" a4
something outside of all biological phenomena. In an excessive reaction
against this philosophy some moderns are prone to disparage everything

176

Humm Action

in which man differs from other animals. In their eyes human reason is inferior to the animal instincts and impulses; it is unnatural and therefore
bad. With them the terms rationalism and rational behavior have an opprobrious connotation. T h e perfect man, the real man, is a being who obeys
his primordial instincts more than his reason.
The obvious truth is that reason, man's most characteristic feature, is
also a biological phenomcnon. It is neither lnorc nor less natural than any
other feature of the species homo sapiens, for instance, the upright gait or
the hairless skin.

IX. THE ROLE OF IDEAS
I.

H u m a n Reason

EASON is man's particular and characteristic feature. There is no
R n e e d for praxeology to raise the question whether reason is a
suitable tool for the cognition of ultimate and absolute truth. I t
deals with reason only as far as it enables man to act.
All those objects which are the substratum of human sensation,
perception, and observation also pass before the senses of animals.
But man alone has the faculty of transforming sensuous stimuli into
observation and experience. And man alone can arrange his various
observations and experiences into a coherent system.
Action is preceded by thinking. Thinking is to deliberate beforehand over future action and to reflect afterward upon past action.
Thinking and acting are inseparable. Every action is always based
on a definite idea about causal relations. H e who thinks a causal relation thinks a theorem. Action without thinking, practice without
theory are unimaginable. T h e reasoning may be faulty and the theory
incorrect; but thinking and theorizing are not lacking in any action.
O n the other hand thinking is always thinking of a potential action.
Even he who thinks of a pure theory assumes that the theory is
correct, i.e., that action complying with its content would resuit in
an effect to be expected from its teachings. I t is of no relevance for
logic whether such action is feasible or not.
I t is always the individual who thinks. Society does not think
any more than it eats or drinks. T h e evolution of human reasoning
from the nahe thinking of primitive man to the more subtle thinking of modern scicnce took place within society. However, thinking
itself is always an achievement of individuals. here is joint action,
but no joint thinking. There is only tradition which preserves thoughts
and communicates them to others as a stimulus to their thinking.
However, man has no means of appropriating the thoughts of his
precursors other than to think them over again. Then, of course, lie
is in a position to proceed farther on the basis of his forerunners'
thoughts. The foremost vehicle of tradition is the word. Thinking is
linked up with langnaage and vice versa. Concepts are embodied in
terms. Language is a tool of thinking as it is a tool of social action.

Human Action

178

The history of thought and ideas is a discourse carried on from
generation to generation. The thinking of later ages grows out of
the thinking of earlier ages. Without the aid of this stimulation intellectual progress would have been impossible. The continuity of
human evolution, sowing for the offspring and harvesting on land
cleared and tilled by the ancestors, manifests itself also in the history
of science and ideas. W e have inherited from our forefathers not
only a stock of products of various orders of goods which is the
source of our material wealth; we have no less inherited ideas and
thoughts, theories and technologies to which our thinking owes its
productivity.
But thinking is always a manifestation of individuals.
2.

World View and Ideology

T h e theories directing action are often imperfect and unsatisfactory. They may be contradictory and unfit to be arranged into a
cornprehensive and coherent system.
If we look at all the theorems and theories guiding the conduct of
certain individuals and groups as a coherent complex and try to arrange them as far as is feasible into a system, i.e., a cornprehensive body
of knowledge, we may speak of it as a world view. A world view
is, as a theory, an interpretation of all things, and as a precept for
action, an opinion concerning the best means for removing uneasiness
as much as possible. A world view is thus, on the one hand, an explanation of all phenomena and, on the other hand, a technology, both
these terms being taken in their broadest sense. Religion, metaphysics,
and philosophy aim at providing a world view. They interpret the
universe and they advise men how to act.
T h e concept of an ideology is narrower than that of a world view.
In speaking of ideology we have in view only human action and social
cooperation and disregard the problems of metaphysics, religious
dogma, the natural sciences, and the technoiogies derived from them.
Ideology is the totality of our doctrines concerning individual conduct and social relations. Both, world view and ideology, go beyond
the limits imposed upon a purely neutral and academic study of things
as they are. They are not only scientific theories, but also doctrines
about the ought, i.e., about the ultimate ends which man should ailn
at in his earthly concerns.
Asceticism teaches that the only means open to man for removing
pain and for attaining complete quietude, contentment, and happiness
is to turn away from earthly concerns and to live without bothering

The Role of Ideas

I79

about worldly things. There is no salvation other than to renounce
striving after material well-being, to endure submissively the adversities of the earthly pilgrimage and to dedicate oneself exclusively to
the preparation for eternal bliss. However, the number of those who
consistently and unswervingly comply with the principles of asceticism is so small that it is not easy to instance more than a few names.
It seems that the complete passivity advocated by asceticism is
contrary to nature. Thc enticement of life triumphs. The ascetic
principles have been adulterated. Even the most saintly hermits made
concessions to lifc and earthly concerns which did not agree with
their rigid principles. But as soon as a man takes into account any
earthly concerns, and substitutes for purely vegetative ideals an
acknowlcdgmcnt of worldly things, however conditioned and incompatible with the rest of his professed doctrine, he bridges over the
gulf which separated him from those who say yes to the striving after
earthly ends. Then he has something in common with everyone
else.
Human thoughts about things of which neither pure reasoning nor
experience provides any knowledge may differ so radically that no
agreement can be reached. In this sphere in which the free reverie
of the mind is restricted neither by logical thinking nor by sensory
experience man can give vent to his individuality and subjectivity.
Nothing is more personal than thc notions and images about the
transcendent. Linguistic terms are unable to communicate what is
said about the transcendent; one can ncver establish whethcr the
hearer conceives them in the same way as the speaker. With regard
to things beyond there can be no agrecment. Religious wars are the
most terrible wars because they are waged without any prospect of
conciliation.
But where earthly things are involved, the natural affinity of all
men and the identity of thc biologicaI conditions for the preservation
of their livcs come into play. The higher productivity of cooperation
under division of iibor makes soclety the foremost means of every
individual for the attainment of his own ends whatever they may be.
The maintenance and further intcnsification of social cooperation
become a concern of everybody. Every world view and every ideology which is not entirely and unconditionally committed to the practice of asceticism and to a lifc in anchoritic reclusion must pay heed
to the fact that society is the great means for the attainment of earthly
ends. But then a common ground is won to clear the way for an agreement concerning minor social problems and the details of society's
organization. Howcver various ideologies may conflict with one

I 80

Human Action

another, they harmonize in one point, in the acltnowledgment of life
in society.
People fail sometimes to see this fact because in dealing with
philosophies and ideologies they look more at what these doctrines
assert with regard to transcendent and unknowable things and less
at their statements about action in this w-orld. Between various parts
of an ideological system there is often an unbridgeable gulf. For
acting man only those teachings are of real importance which result
in precepts for action, not those doctrines which are purely academic
and do not apply to conduct within the frame of social cooperation.
W e may disregard the philosophy of adamant and consistent asceticism because such a rigid asceticism must ultimately result in the
extinction of its supporters. All other ideologies, in approving of the
search for the necessities of life, arc forced in some measure to take
into account the fact that division of labor is more productive than
isolated work. They thus admit the need for social cooperation.
Praxeology and economics are not qualified to deal with the transcendent and metaphysical aspects of any doctrine. But, on the other
hand, no appeal to any religious or metaphysical dogmas and creeds
can invalidate the theorems and theories concerning social cooperation as developed by logically correct praxeological reasoning. If a
philosophy has admitted the necessity of societal links between men,
it has placed itseIf, as far as problems of social action come into play,
on ground from which there is no escape into personal convictions
and professions of faith not liable to a thorough examination by
methods of science.
This fundamental fact is often ignored. People believe that differences in world view create irreconcilable conflicts. The basic antagonisms between parties committed to different world views, it is contended, cannot be settled by compromise. They stem from the deepest
recesses of the human soul and are expressive of a man's innate communion with supernatural and eternal forces. There can never be any
,
,
.
c
:
,
I.,+ ,
.,,,, ,,,,1, A:..:A,A I., A:#,,+
.., "12 ,-:,..,
L V V C . L d U V 1 1 U L L W G G l l Y C V Y l G U l V l U C U U Y U l 1 l C l Z ; l l L W V l l U V LC WD.
'l
However, if we pass in review the programs of all parties-both
the cleverly elaborated and publicized programs and those to which
the parties really cling when in power-we can easily discover the
fallacy of this interpretation. All present-day political parties strive
after the earthly well-being and prosperity of their supporters. They
promise that they will render economic conditions more satisfactory
to their followers. With regard to this issue there is no difference
between the Roman Catholic Church and the various Protestant denominations as far as they intervene in political and social questions,

The Role of Ideas
between Christianity and the non-Christian religions, between the
advocates of economic freedom and the various brands of !Marxian
materialism, between nationalists and internationalists, between racists
and the friends of interracial peace. It is true, that many of these
parties believe that their own group cannot prosper except at the
expense of other groups, and even go so far as to consider the complete annihilation of other groups or their enslavement as the necessary condition of their own group's prosperity. Yet, extermination or
enslavement of others is for them not an ultimate end, but a means
for the attainment of what they aim at as an ultimate end: their own
group's flowering. If they were to learn that their own designs are
guided by spurious theories and would not bring about the beneficia1
results expected, they would change their programs.
The pompous statemcnts which people make about things unknowable and beyond the power of the human mind, their cosmoIogies, world vicws, religions, mysticisms, metaphysics, and conceptual
phantasies differ widely from one another. But the practical essence
of their ideologies, i.e., their teachings dealing with the ends to be
aimed at in earthly lifc and with the means for the attainment of
these ends, show much uniformity. Therc are, to be sure, differences
and antagonisms both with rcgard to ends and means. Yet the differences with rcgard to ends are not irreconcilable; they do not hinder
cooperation and amicable arrangements in the sphere of social action.
As far as they concern means and ways only they are of a purely
technicaI character and as such open to examination by rational methods. When in the heat of party conflicts one of the factions declares:
"Here we cannot go on in our negotiations with you because we
are faced with a question touching upon our world view; on this
point we must be adamant and must cling riaidly to our principles
P
whatever may result," one need only scrutin~zematters more carefully to realize that such declarations describe the antagonism as more
pointed than it really is. In fact, for all parties committed to pursuit
of the people's earthly welfare and thus approving social cooperation,
questions of social oiganization and the conduct of social action are
not problems of ultimate principles and of world views, but ideological issues. They are technical problems with regard to which some
arrangement is always possible. N o party would wittingly prefer
social disintegration, anarchy, and a return to primitive barbarism to
a solution which must be bought at the price of the sacrifice of some
ideological points.
In party programs these technical issues are, of course, of primary
importance. A party is committed to certain means, it recommends

182

Human Action

certain methods of political action and rejects utterly all other methods and policies as inappropriate. A party is a body which combines
a11 those eager to employ the same means for common action. T h e
principle which differentiates men and integrates parties is the choice
of means. Thus for the party as such the means chosen are essential.
A party is doomed if the futility of the means recommended becomes
obvious. Party chicfs whose prestige and political career are bound
up with the party's program may have ample reasons for withdrawing its principles from unrestricted discussion; they may attribute
to them the character of ultimate ends which must not be questioned
because they are based on a world view. But for the people as whose
mandataries the party chiefs pretend to act, for the voters whom they
want to enlist and for whose votes they canvass, things ogcr another
aspect. They have no objection to scrutinizing every point of a
party's program. 171ey look upon such a program only as a recommendation of means fdr the attainment of their own ends, viz., earthly
well-being.
What divides those parties which one calls today world view
parties, i.c., parties committed to basic philosophical decisions about
ultimate ends, is only seeming disagreement with regard to ultimate
ends. Their antagonisms refer either to religious creeds or to problems of international relations or to the problem of ownership of the
rneans of production or to problems of political organization. I t can
be shown that all these controvcrsics concern means and not uItimate
ends.
Let us begin with the problems of a nation's political organization. There are supporters of a democratic system of government, of
hereditary monarchy, of the rule of a self-styled elite and of Caesarist
dictat0rship.l It is true that these programs are often recommended
by reference to divine institutions, to the eternal laws of the universe, to the natural order, to the inevitable trend of historical evolution, and to other objects of transcendent knowledge. But such statements are rnerely incidental adornment. In appealing to the electorate,
the parties advance other arguments. They are eager to show that
the system they support will succeed better than those advocated by
other parties in realizing those ends which the citizcns aim at. They
specify the beneficial resuIts achieved in the past or in other countries;
they disparage the other parties' programs by relating their failures.
T h e y resort both to pure reasoning and to an interpretation of historical experience in order to demonstrate the superiority of their
I. Caesarism is today exemplified by the Bolshevik, Fascist, or Nazi type of
dictatorship.

The Role of Ideas

183

own proposals and the futility of those of their adversaries. Their
main argument is always: the political system we support will render
vou more prosperous and more content.
In the field of society's economic organization there are the liberals
advocating privatc ownership of the means of production, the socialists advocating public ownership of the means of production, and
the interventionists advocating a third system which, they contend,
is as far from socialism as it is from capitalism. In the clash of these
partics there is again much talk about basic philosophical issues.
People speak of true liberty, equaIity, social justice, the rights of the
individual, community, solidarity, and humanitarianism. But each
party is intent upon proving by ratiocination and by referring to
historical experience that only the system it recommends will make
the citizcns prosperous and satisfied. They tell the people that realization of their program will raise the standard of living to a higher level
than realization of any other party's program. They insist upon the
expediency of their plans and upon their utility. It is obvious that
they do not diffcr from one another with regard to cnds but only as
to means. They all pretend to aim at the highest material welfare
for the majority of citizens.
The nationalists strcss the point that there is an irreconcilable conflict bctween the intercsts of various nations, but that, on the other
hand, the rightly understood interests of all the citizens within the
nation arc harmonious. A nation can prosper only at the expense of
other nations; the individual citizen can fare well only if his nation
flourishes. The liberals have a different opinion. They believe that
the interests of various nations harmonize no less than those of the
various groups, classes, and strata of individuals within a nation. Thcy
believe that peaceful international cooperation is a more appropriate
means than conflict for attainment of the end which they and the
nationalists are both aiming at: their own nation's welfare. Thcy do
not, as thc nationalists charge, advocate peace and free trade in order
to betray their own nation's interests to those of foreigners. On the
contrary, thcy consider peace and free trade the best means to
make their own nation wealthy. What separates the free traders from
the nationalists is not ends, but the means recommended for attainment of the cnds common to both.
Dissension with regard to religious creeds cannot be settled by
rational methods. Religious conflicts are essentially implacable and
irreconcilable. Yet as soon as a religious community enters the ficld
of political action and tries to deal with problems of social organization, it is bound to take into account earthly concerns, however this

184

H u m a ~Action

may conflict with its dogmas and articles of faith. N o religion in its
exoteric activities ever ventured to tell people frankly: T h e realization of our plans for social organization will make you poor and impair your earthly well-being. Those consistently committed to a life
of poverty withdrew from the political scene and flcd into anchoritic
scclusion. But churches and religious communities which have aimed
at making converts and at influencing political and social activities
of their followers have espoused the principles of secular conduct. In
dealing with questions of man's earthly pilgrimage they hardly differ
from any other political party. In canvassing, they emphasize the
material advantages which they have in store for their brothers in
faith more than bliss in the beyond.
Only a world view whose supporters renounce any earthly activity
whatever could neglect to pay heed to the rational considerations
which show that social cooperation is the great means for the attainment of all human ends. Because man is a social animal that can thrive
only within society, all ideologies are forced to acknowledge the
preeminent importance of social cooperation. T h e y must aim at the
most satisfactory organization of society and must approve of man's
concern for an improvement of his material well-being. Thus they
all place themselves upon a common ground. They are separated from
one another not by world views and transcendent issues not subject
to reasonable discussion, but by problems of means and ways. Such
ideological antagonisms are open to a thorough scrutiny by the
scientific methods of praxeology and economics.

The Fight Against Error
A critical examination of the philosophical systems constructed by mankind's great thinkers has very often revealed fissures and flaws in the impressivc structure of those seemingly consistent and coherent bodies of
comprehensive thought. Even the genius in drafting a world view sometimes fails to avoid contradictions and fallacious syllogisms.
The ideologies accepted by public opinion are still more infected by the
shortcomings of the human mind. They are mostly an ecIectic juxtaposition of ideas utterly incompatible with one another. They cannot stand a
logical examination of their content. Their inconsistencies are irreparable
and defy any attempt to combine their various parts into a system of ideas
compatible with one another.
Some authors try to justify the contradictions of generally accepted
ideologies by pointing out the alleged advantages of a compromise, however unsatisfactory from the logical point of view, for the smooth functioning of interhuman relations. They refer to the popular fallacy that life and
reality are "not logical"; they contend that a contradictory system may

T h e Role of Ideas

185

prove its expediency or even its truth by working satisfactorily while a
logically consistent system would result in disaster. There is no need to
refute anew such popular errors. Logical thinking and real life are not
two separate orbits. Logic is for man the only means to master the problems
of reality. What is contradictory in theory, is no less contradictory in
reality. N o ideological inconsistency can provide a satisfactory, i.e., working, solution for the problems offered by the facts of the world. The only
effect of contradictory ideologies is to conceal the real problems and thus
to prevent people from finding in time an appropriate policy for solving
them. Inconsistent ideologies may sometimes postpone the emergence of a
manifest conflict. But they certainly aggravate the evils which they mask
and rcnder a final solution more difficult. They multiply the agonies, they
intensify the hatreds, and make peaceful settlement impossible. It is a
serious blunder t o consider ideological contradictions harmless or even
beneficial.
The main objective of praxeology and economics is to substitute consistent correct ideologies for the contradictory tenets of popular eclecticism.
Therc is no other means of preventing social distintegration and of safeguarding the steady improvement of human conditions than those provided
by reason. Men must try to think through all the problems involved up ta
the point beyond which a human mind cannot proceed farther. They must
never acquiesce in any solutions conveyed by older generations, they must
always question anew every theory and every theorem, they must never
relax in their endeavors to brush away fallacies and to find the best possible
cognition. They must fight error by unmasking spurious doctrines and by
expounding truth.
T h e problems involved are purely intellectual and must be dealt with
as such. It is disastrous to shift them to the moral sphere and to dispose of
supporters of opposite ideologies by calling them villains. It is vain to insist that what we are aiming at is good and what our adversaries want is
bad. T h e question t o be solved is precisely what is to be considered as good
and what as bad. The rigid dogmatism peculiar to religious groups and to
Marxism results only in irreconcilable conflict. It condemns beforehand all
dissenters as evildoers, it calls into question their good faith, it asks them
to surrender unconditionally. N o social cooperation is possible where such
an attitude prevails.
N o better is the propensity, very popular nowadays, to brand supporters
of other ideologies as lunatics. Psychiatrists are vague in drawing a line
between sanity and insanity. It would be preposterous for laymen to interfere with this fundamental issue of psychiatry. However, it is clear that if
the mere fact that a man shares erroneous views and acts according to his
errors qualifies him as mentally disabled, it would be very hard to discover
an individual to which the epithet sane or normal could be attributed. Then
we are bound to call the past generations lunatic because their ideas about
the problems of the natural sciences and concomitantly their techniques
differed from ours. Coming generations will call us lunatics for the same

I 86

Human Action

reason. Man is liable to error. If to err were the characteristic feature of
mental disability, thcn everybody shouId be caIled mentally disabled.
Neither can the fact that a man is at variance with the opinions held by
the majority of his contemporaries qualify him as a lunatic. Were Copernicus, Galileo and Lavoisier insane? It is the regular course of history that a
man conceives new ideas, contrary to those of other people. Some of these
ideas are later embodied in the system of knowledge accepted by public
opinion as true. Is it permissible to apply the epithet "sane" only to boors
who never had ideas of their own and t o deny it to all innovators?
The procedure of some contemporary psychiatrists is really outrageous.
'They are utterly ignorant of the theories of praxeoIogy and economics.
Their familiarity with present-day ideologies is superficial and uncritical.
Yet they blithely call the supporters of some ideologies paranoid persons.
There are men who are commonly stigmatized as monetary cranks. The
monetary crank suggests a method for making everybody prosperous by
monetary measures. His plans are illusory. However, they are thc consistent application of a monctary ideology entirely approved by contemporary public opinion and espoused by the policies of almost all governments.
The objections raised against these ideological crrors by the economists
are not taken into account by the governments, political parties, and the
press.
I t is generally believed by those unfamiliar with economic theory that
credit expansion and an increase in the quantity of money in circulation
are efficacious means for lowering the rate of interest permanently below
the height it would attain on a nonrnanipulatcd capital and loan market.
This theory is uttcrly i l l u ~ o r y . ~
But it guides the monetary and credit
policy of almost every contemporary government. Now, on the basis of
this vicious ideology, no valid objection can be raised against the plans
advanced by Pierre Joseph Proudhon, Ernest Solvay, Clifford Hugh
Douglas and a host of other would-be reformers. They are only more
consistent than other people are. They want to reduce the rate of interest
to zero and thus to abolish altogether the scarcity of "capital." He who
wants to refutc them must attack the theories underlying the monetary and
credit policies of the great nations.
The psychiatrist may object that what characterizes a man as a lunatic
is precisely the fact that he lacks moderation and goes to extremes. While
normal man is judicious enough to restrain himself, the paranoid person
goes beyond all bounds. This is quite an unsatisfactory rejoinder. All the
arguments advanced in favor of the thesis that the rate of interest can be
reduced by credit expansion from j or 4 per cent to 3 or 2 per cent are
equally valid for a reduction to zero. The "monetary cranks" are certainly
from the point of view of the monetary fallacies approved by popular
opinion.
1. Cf. below, Chapter XX.

The Role of ldeas
There are psychiatrists who call the Germans who espoused the principles of Sazism lunatics and want to cure them by therapeutic procedures.
Here again we are faced with the same problem. The doctrines of hTazism
are vicious, but they do not essentially disagree with the ideoIogics of
socialism and nationalism as approved by other peoples' public opinion.
What characterized the Kazis was only the consistent application of these
ideologies to the special conditions of Germany. Like all other contemporary nations the Kazis desired government control of business and
economic self-sufficiency, i.e., autarky, for their own nation. The distinctive mark of their policy was that they refused to acquiesce in the disadvantages which the acceptance of the same system by other nations would
impose upon them. They were not prepared to be forever "imprisoned,"
as they said, within a comparatively overpopulated area in which physical
conditions render the productivity of labor lower than in other countries.
They believed that their nation's great population figures, the strategically
propitious geographic situation of their country, and the inborn vigor and
gallantry of their armed forces provided them with a good chance to
remedy by aggression the evils they deplored.
Now, whoever accepts the ideology of nationalism and socialism as true
and as the standard of his own nation's policy, is not in a position to refute
the conclusions drawn from them by the Nazis. The only way for a refutation of Nazism left for foreign nations which have espoused these two
principles is to defeat the Nazis in war. And as long as thc ideology of
socialism and nationalism is supreme in the world's public opinion, the
Germans or other peoples will try again to succeed by aggression and conquest, should the opportunity ever be offered to them. There is no hope
of eradicating the aggression mentality if one does not explode entirely
the ideological fallacies from which it stems. This is not a task for psychiatrists, but for economist^.^
What is wrong with the Germans is certainly not that thcy do not comply with the teachings of the Gospels. No nation ever did. With the exception of the small and uninfluential groups of the Friends practically all
Christian churches and sects blessed the arms of warriors. The most ruthless
among the older German conquerors were the Teutonic Knights who
fought in the name of the Cross. The source of present-day German aggressiveness is the very fact that the Germans have discarded liberal
philosophy and substituted the ideology of nationalism and socialism for
the liberal principles of free trade and peace. If mankind does not return
to the ideas today disparaged as "orthodox," "Manchester philosophy,"
and "laissez faire," the only method to prevent a new aggression is to
render the Germans innocuous by depriving them of the means of waging
war.
Man has only one tool to fight error: reason.
3. Cf. Mises, Omnipotent Government (New Haven, 1944)~pp. 221-228,
131, 135-140.

12y-

Human Action
3. Might
Society is a product of human action. Human action is directed
by ideologies. Thus society and any concrete order of social affairs
are an outcome of ideologies; ideologies are not, as Marxism asserts,
a product of a certain state of social affairs. T o be sure, human
thoughts and ideas are not the achievement of isolated individuals.
Thinking too succeeds only through the cooperation of the thinkers.
N o individual would make headway in his reasoning if he were under
the necessity of starting from the beginning. A man can advance in
thinking only because his efforts are aided by those of older generations who have formed the tools of thinking, the concepts and
terminologies, and have raised the problems.
Any given social order was thought out and designed before it
could be realized. This temporal and logical precedence of the
ideological factor does not imply the proposition that people draft
a complete plan of a social system as the utopians do. What is and
must be thought out in advance is not the concerting of individual's
actions into an integrated system of social organization, but the actions
of individuals with regard to their fellow men and of already formed
groups of individuals with regard to other groups. Before a man
aids his fellow in cutting a tree, such cooperation must be thought
out. Before an act of barter takes place, the idea of mutual exchange
of goods and services must be conceived. It is not necessary
that the individuals concerned become aware of the fact that such
mutuality results in the establishment of social bonds and in the
emergence of a social system. T h e individual does not plan and execute actions intended to construct society. His conduct and the corresponding conduct of others generate social bodies.
Any existing state of social affairs is the product of ideologies previousiy thought out. Within society new ideologies may emerge and
may supersede oider ideoiogies and thus transform the sociai system,
However, society is always the creation of ideologies temporally and
logically anterior. Action is always directed b y ideas; it realizes what
previous thinking has designed.
If we hypostatize or anthropomorphize the notion of ideology,
we may say that ideologies have might over men. Might is the faculty
or power of directing actions. As a rule one says only of a man or
of groups of men that they are mighty. Then the definition of might
is: might is the power to direct other people's actions. H e who is
mighty, owes his might to an ideology. Only ideologies can convey

The Role of ldeas
to a man the power to influence other people's choices and conduct.
One can become a leader only if one is supported by an ideology
which makes other ~ e o p l etractable and accommodating. Might is
thus not a physical and tangible thing, but a moral and spiritual
phenomenon. A king's might rests upon the recognition of the monarchical ideology on the part of his subjects.
H e who uses his might to m n the state, i.e., the social apparatus
of coercion and compulsion, rules. RuIe is the exercise of might in
the political body. Rule is always based upon might, i.e., the power
to direct other people's actions.
Of course, it is possible to establish a government upon the violent
oppression of reluctant people. I t is the characteristic mark of state
and government that they apply violent coercion or the threat of
it against those not prepared to yield voluntarily. Yet such violent
oppression is no less founded upon ideological might. He who
wants to apply violence needs the vohntary cooperation of some
people. An individual entirely dependent on himself can never rule
by means of physical violence
H e needs the ideological support of a group in order to subduc other groups. The tyrant must
have a retinue of partisans who obey his orders of their own accord.
Their spontaneous obedience provides him with the apparatus he
needs for the conquest of other people. Whether or not he succeeds
in making his sway last depends on the numerical relation of the two
groups, those who support him voluntarily and those whom he beats
into submission. Though a tyrant may temporarily rule through a
minority if this minority is armed and the majority is not, in the long
run a minority cannot keep the majority in subservience. T h e oppressed will rise in rebeIlion and cast off the yoke of tyranny.
A durabIe system of government must rest upon an ideology acknowledged by the majority. T h e "real" factor, thc "real forces" that
are the foundation of goverhment and convey to the rulers the power
to use violence against renitent minority groups are essentially ideological, moral, and spiritual. Rulers who failed to recognize this
first principle of government and, relying upon the alleged irresistibility of their armed troops, disdained the spirit and ideas, have
finally been overthrown by the assault of their adversaries. The interpreration of might as a "real" factor not dependent upon ideologies,
q~~ite
common to many political and historical books, is erroneous.
T h e term Realpolitik makes sense only if used to signify a policy
taking account of generally accepted ideologies as contrasted with
4. A gangster may overpower a weaker or unarmed fellow. However, this has
nothing to do with life in society. It is an isolated antisocial occurrence.

190
Human Action
a policy based upon ideologies not sufficiently acknowledged and
thcrcfore unfit to support a durabIe system of government.
H e who interprets tnight as physical or "real" power to carry on
and considers violent action as the very foundation of government,
sees conditions from the narrow point of view of subordinate officers
in charge of sections of an army or police force. T o these subordinates a definite task within the framework of the ruling ideology
is assigned. Thcir chiefs commit to their care troops which are not
only equippcd, armed, and organized for combat, but no less imbued
with the spirit which makes them obey the orders issued. T h e cornmanders of such subdivisions consider this moral factor a matter of
course bccause they themselves are animated by the same spirit and
cannot cven imagine a different ideology. T h e power of an ideology
consists precisely in the fact that people submit to it without any
wavering and scruples.
However, things are different for the head of thc government. H e
must aim at preservation of thc morale of the armed forces and of the
loyalty of the rest of the population. For these moral factors are the
only "real" elemcnts upon which continuance of his mastcry rcsts.
His power du-indles if the ideology that supports it disappears.
Minorities too can sometimes conquer by means of superior military skill and can thiis establish minority rule. But such an order of
things cannot endure. If the victorious conquerors do not succeed
in subsequently converting the system of rule by violence into a
system of rule by ideological consent on the part of those ruled, they
will succumb in ncw str~zggles.A11 victorious minorities who have
estalJished a lasting system of government have made their sway
durable by means of a belated ideological ascendancy. They have
lcgitimized their own supremacy cithcr by submitting to the ideologies
of the defeated or by transforming them. Where neither of these two
things tool: placc, the oppressed many dispossesscd the oppressing
few either b y open rebcllion or through the silent but steadfast operation of ideological forces5
Many of the great historical conquests were able to endure because the invadcrs cntered into alliancc with those classes of the defeated nation which werc supported by the ruling ideology and were
thus considered legitimate rulers. This was the system adopted by the
Tartars in Russia, by the Turks in the Danube principalities and by
and Iarge in Hungary and Transylvania, and by the British and the
Dutch in the Indies. A comparatively insignificant number of Britons
could rule many hundrcd millions of Indians because the Indian
5. Cf. below, pp. 645646.

The Role of Ideas
princes and aristocratic landowners looked upon British rule as a
means for the preservation of their privileges and supplied it with
the support which the generally acltnoudedged ideology of India
gave to their own supremacy. England's Indian empire was firm as
long as public opinion approved of the traditional social order. The
Pax Britannica safeguarded the princes' and the landlords' privileges
and protected the masses against the agonies of wars between the
principalities and of succession wars within them. In our day the
infiltration of subversive ideas from abroad has undermined British
rule and a t the same time threatens the preservation of the country's
age-old social order.
Victorious minorities sometimes owe their success to their technological superiority. This does not alter the case. I n the long run it is
impossible to withhold the better arms from the members of the
majority. N o t the equipment of their armed forces, but ideological
factors safeguarded the British in India.@
A country's public opinion may be ideologically divided in such
a way that no group is strong enough to establish a durabIe governmenr. T h e n anarchy emerges. Revolutions and civil strife become
permanent.

T~raditionalisnzas an Ideology
Traditionalism is an ideology which considers loyalty to valuations,
customs, and methods of procedure handed down or allegedly handed
down from ancestors both right and expedient. It is not an essential mark
of traditionalism that these forefathers were the ancestors in the biological
meaning of the term or can be fairly considered such; they were sometimes
only the previous inhabitants of the country concerned or supporters of
the same religious creed or only precursors in the exercise of some special
task. Who is to be considered an ancestor and what is the content of the
body of tradition handed down are detcrmined by the concrete teachings
of each variety of traditionalism. The ideology brings into prominence
some of the ancestors and relegates others to oblivion; it sometimes calls
ancestors people who had nothing to do with the alleged posterity. It
often constructs a "traditional" doctrine which is of recent origin and is
at variance with the ideologies really held by the ancestors.
Traditionalism tries to justify its tenets by citing the success they secured
in the past. Whether this assertion conforms with the facts, is another
question. Research could sometimes unmask errors in the historical statements of a traditional belief. However, this did not always explode the
traditional doctrine. For the core of traditionalism is not real historical
6. We are dealing here with the preservation of European minority rule in
non-Europcan countries. About the prospects of an Asiatic aggression on the
West cf. below, pp. 665-666.

192

Human Action

facts, but an opinion about them, however mistaken, and a will to believe
things to which the authority of ancient origin is attributed.

4. Meliorism and the Idea of Progress
T h e notions of progress and retrogression make sense only within
a teleological system of thought. In such a framework it is sensible to
call approach toward the goal aimed at progress and a movement in
the opposite direction retrogression. Without reference to some
agent's action and to a definite goal both these notions are empty
and void of any meaning.
It was one of the shortcomings of nineteenth-century philosophies
to have misinterpreted the meaning of cosmic change and to have
smuggled into the theory of biological transformation the idea of
progress. Looking backward from any given state of things to the
states of the past one can fairly use the terms development and evolution in a neutral sense. Then evolution signifies the process which
led from past conditions to the present. But one must guard against
the fatal error of confusing change with improvcrnent and evolution
with evolution toward higher forms of life. Neither is it permissible
to substitute a pseudoscientific anthropoccntrism for the anthropocentrism of rcligion and the older metaphysical doctrines.
Howcver, there is no need for praxeology to enter into a critique
of his philosophy. Its task is to explode the errors implied in current
ideologies.
Eighteenth-century social philosophy was convinced that mankind
has now finally entered the age of reason. While in the past theological
and metaphysical errors were dominant, henceforth reason will be
supreme. Pcople will free themselves more and more from the chains
of tradition and superstition and will dedicate all their efforts to the
continuous improvement of social institutions. Every new generation will contribute its part to this glorious task. With the progress
of time society will more and more become the society of free men,
aiming at the greatest happiness of the greatest number. Temporary
setbacks are, of course, not impossible. But finally the good cause will
triumph because it is the cause of reason. People called themselves
happy in that they were citizens of an age of enlightenment which
through the discovery of the laws of rational conduct paved the
way toward a steady amelioration of human affairs. What they
lamented was only the fact that they themselves were too old to witness all the beneficial effects of the new philosophy. "I would wish,"
said Bentham to Philarirte Chasles, "to be granted the privilege to

The Role of ldeas

I93

live the years which I have still to live, at the end of each of the centuries following my death; tlms I could witness the effects of my
writings."
All these hopes were founded on the firm conviction, proper to the
age, that the masses are both morally good and reasonable. The upper
strata, the privileged aristocrats living on the fat of the land, were
thought depraved. T h e common people, especially the peasants and
the workers, were glorified in a romantic mood as noble and unerring
in their judgment. Thus the philosophers were confident that democracy, government by the pcopIe, would bring about social perfection.
This prejudice was the fateful error of the humanitarians, the
philosophers, and the liberals. Men are not infallible; they err very
often. It is not true that the masses are always right and know the
means for attaining the cnds aimed at. "Belief in the common man"
is no better founded than was belief in the supernatural gifts of kings,
priests, and noblemen. Democracy guarantees a system of government in accordance with the wishes and plans of the majority. But
it cannot prevent majorities from falling victim t o erroneous ideas
and from adopting inappropriate policies which not only fail to
realize the ends aimed at but result in disaster. Majorities too may err
and destroy our civilization. The good cause will not triumph merely
on account of its reasonableness and expediency. Only if men are
such that they will finally espouse policies reasonable and likcly to attain the ultimate cnds aimed at, will civilization improve and society
and state render men more satisfied, although not happy in a metaphysical sense. Whether or not this condition is given, only the unknown future can reveal.
There is no room within a system of praxeology for meliorism and
optimistic fatalism. Man is frec in the sense that he must daily choose
anew between policies that lead to success and those that lead to
disaster, social disintegration, and barbarism.
T h e term progress is nonsensical when applied to cosmic events or
to a comprehensive world view. W e have no information about the
plans of the prime mover. But it is different with its use in the frame
of an ideological doctrine. T h e immense majority strives after a
greater and better supply of food, clothes, homes, and other material
amenities. In calling a rise in the masses' standard of living progress
and improvement, economists do not espouse a mean materialism.
T h e y simply establish the fact that people are motivated b y the
7. Philar6te Chasles, Etudes sur les ho7nmes et les moers du x~xesi2cle (Paris,
1849) t p. 89.

194
Human Action
urge to improve the material conditions of their existence. They judge
policies from the point of view of the aims men want to attain. He
who disdains the fall in infant mortality and the gradual disappearance
of famines and plagues may cast the first stone upon the materialism
of the economists.
There is but one yardstick for the appraisal of human action:
whether or not it is fit to attain the ends aimed at by acting men.

X. EXCHANGE W I T H I N SOCIETY
I.

Autistic Exchange and Interpersonal Exchange

always is essentially the exchange of one state of affairs
A
for another state of affairs. If the action is performed by an individual without any reference to cooperation with other individuals,
CTION

we may call it autistic exchange. An instance: the isolated hunter who
kills an animal for his own consumption; he exchanges leisure and a
cartridge for food.
Within society cooperation substitutes interpersonal or social exchange for autistic exchanges. Man gives to other men in order to
receive from them. Mutuality emerges. Man serves in order to be
served.
The exchange relation is the fundamental social relation. Interpersonal exchange of goods and services weaves the bond which
unites men into society. The societal formula is: do ut des. Where
there is no intentional mutuality, where an action is performed without any design of being benefited by a concomitant action of other
men, there is no interpersona1 exchange, but autistic exchange. It
does not matter whether the autistic action is beneficial or detrimental
to other people or whether it does not concern them at alI. A genius
may perform his task for himself, not for the crowd; however, he is
an outstanding benefactor of mankind. The robber kills the victim
for his own advantage; the murdered man is by no means a partner in
this crime, he is mereIy its object; what is done, is done against him.
Hostile aggression was a practice common to man's nonhuman forebears. Camciaus a d pnrpeseh! c m p e r a t i y is the mtc=me ~f 2
long evolutionary process. Ethnology and hlstory have provided us
with interesting information concerning the beginning arid the primitive patterns of interpersonal exchange. Some consider the custom of
mutual giving and returning of presents and stipulating a certain return present in advance as a precursory pattern of intcrpersonal exchange.l Others consider dumb barter as the primitive mode of trade.
However, to make presents in the expectation of being rewarded
r . Gustav Cassel, T h e Theory of Social Economy, trans. by S. L. Banon,
(new ed. London, ~ 9 3 2 1 ,p. 371.

Human Action
by the receiver's return present or insorder to acquire the favor of
a man whose animosity could be disastrous, is already tantamount to
interpersonal exchange. T h e same applies to dumb barter which is
distinguished from other modes of bartering and trading only through
the abscnce of oral discussion.
It is the essential characteristic of the categories of human action
that they are apodictic and absolute and do not admit of any gradation. There is action or nonaction, there is exchange or nonexchange;
everything which applies to action and exchange as such is given
or not given in every individual instance according to whether there
is or there is not action and exchange. In the same way the boundaries
between autistic exchange and interpersonal cxchange are sharply
distinct. Making one-sided presents without the aim of being rewarded by any conduct on the part of the receiver or of third persons is autistic exchange. The donor acquires the satisfaction which
the better condition of the receiver gives to him. T h e receiver gets
the present as a God-sent gift. But if presents are given in order to
influence some people's conduct, they are no longer one-sided, but
a variety of interpersonal exchange between the donor and the man
whose conduct they are designed to influence. Although the emergence of interpersonal exchange was the result of a long evolution, no
gradual transition is conceivable between autistic and interpcrsonal
exchangc. There were no intermediary modes of exchange between
them. T h e step which leads from autistic to interpersonal exchange
was no less a jump into something entirely new and essentially different than was the step from automatic reaction of the cells and
nerves to conscious and purposeful behavior, to action.
2.

Contractual Bonds and E-Tegcmonic Bonds

There are two different kinds of social cooperation: cooperation
by virtue of contract and coordinatim, and cooperation by virtue of
command and subordination or hegemony.
Wherc and as far as cooperation is based on contract, the logical
relation betwccn the cooperating individuals is symmetrical. They
are all parties to interpersonal exchange contracts. John has the same
relation to Tom as Tom has t o John. Where and as far as cooperation
is based on command and subordination, there is the man who commands and there are those who obey his orders. T h e logical relation
between these two classes of men is asymmetrical. There is a director
and there are people under his care. T h e director alone chooses and
directs; the others-the wards-are mere pawns in his actions.

Exchange Within Society

197

The power that calls into life and animates any social body is always ideological might, and the fact that makes an individual a member of any socia1 compound is always his own conduct. This is no
less valid with regard to a hegemonic societal bond. It is true, people
are as a rule born into the most important hegemonic bonds, into
the family and into the state, and this was also the case with the
hegemonic bonds of older days, slavery and serfdom, which disappeared in the realm of Western civilization. But no physical violence
and compulsion can possibly force a man against his wiII to remain
in the status of the ward of a hegemonic order. What violence or the
threat of violcnce brings about is a state of affairs in which subjection
as a rule is considered more desirable than rebelIion. Faced with the
choice between the consequences of obedience and of disobedience,
the ward prefers the former and thus integrates himself into the
hegemonic bond. Every new command places this choice before him
again. In yielding again and again he himself contributes his share to
the continuous existence of the hegemonic societal body. Even as a
ward in such a system he is an acting human being, i.e., a being not
simply yielding to blind impulses, but using his reason in choosing between alternatives.
What differentiates the hegemonic bond from the contractual bond
is the scope in which the choices of the individuals detcrmine the
course of events. As soon as a man has decided in favor of his subjection to a hegemonic system, he becomes, within the margin of this
system's activities and for the time of his subjection, a pawn of the
director's actions. Within the hegemonic societal body and as far
as it directs its subordinates' conduct, only the director acts. The
wards act only in choosing subordination; having once chosen subordination they no longer act for themselves, they are taken care of.
In the frame of a contractuaI society the individual members exchange definite quantities of goods and services of a definite quality.
In choosing subjection in a hegemonic body a man neither gives nor
receives anything that is definite. He integrates himself into a system
in which he has to render indefinite services and will receive what the
director is wilIing to assign to him. He is at the mercy of the director.
T h e director alone is free to choose. Whether the director is an individual or an organized group of individuals, a directorate, and
whether the director is a selfish maniacal tyrant or a benevolent paternal despot is of no relevance for the structure of the whole system.
The distinction between these two kinds of social cooperation is
common to all theories of society. Ferguson described it as the con-

I 98

Human Actiolz

trast between warlike nations and commercial nations; Saint Simon
as the contrast between pugnacious nations and peaceful or industrial
nations; Herbert Spencer as the contrast between societies of individual frccdom and those of a militant structure; Sombart as the contrast between heroes and peddler^.^ The Marxians distinguish between the "gentile organization" of a fabulous state of primitive
socicty and the eternal bliss of socialism on the one hand and the nnspeakable degradation of capitalism on the other h a n d . T h e hTazi
philosophers distinguish the counterfeit system of bourgeois security
from the heroic system of authoritarian I;iihrertum. The valuation of
both systems is different with the various sociologists. But they fully
agree in the establishment of the contrast and no less in recognizing
that no third principle is thinkable and feasible.
Western civilization as well as the civilization of the more advanced
Eastern peoples are achievements of men who have cooperated according to the pattern of contractuaI coordination. These civilizations,
it is true, have adopted in some rcspects bonds of hegemonic structure. The state as an apparatus of compulsion and coercion is by necessity a hegemonic organization. So is the family and its household community. Howcver, the characteristic feature of these civiIizations is
the contractual structure proper to the cooperation of the individual
families. There once prevailed almost complete autarky and economic
isolation of the individual household units. When interfamilial exchange of goods and services was substituted for each family's economic seIf-sufficiency, it was, in a11 nations commonIy considered
civilized, a cooperation based on contract. Human civilization as it
has been hitherto known to historical experience is preponderantly
a product of contractual relations.
Any kind of human cooperation and social mutuality is essentially
an order of peace and conciliatory settlement of disputes. In the
domestic relations of any societal unit, be it a contractual or a
hegemonic bond, there must be peace. Where there are violent conflicts and as far'as there are such conflicts, there is neither cooperation
nor socictal bonds. Those political parties which in their eagerness to
substitute the hegemonic system for the contractual system point
at the rottenness of peace and of bourgeois security, extol the moral
2. Cf. Adam Ferguson, A n Essay o n the History of Civil Society (new ed.
Basel, 1789),p. 208.
3. Cf. Herbert Spencer, T h e Principles of Sociology (New York, 1 9 1 4 ) ~
111,
575-61 I .
4. Cf. Werner Sombart, Haendler und Helden (Munich, 1915).
5. Cf. Frederick Engels, T h e Origin of the Family, Private Property and the
State (New York, 1942). p. 144.

Exchange W i t h i n Society

'99

nobility of violence and bloodshed and praise war and revolution as
the emincntly natural methods of intcrhuman relations, contradict
themselves. For their own utopias are designed as realms of peace.
T h e Reich of the Xazis and the co~n~nonwcalth
of the Marxians are
planncd as societies of undisturbed pcace. T h e y are to be created by
pacification, i.e., the violent subjection of all those not ready to
yield without rcsistance. In a contractual world various states can
quietly coexist. In a hegemonic world there can only be one Reich
or commonwcalth and only one dictator. Socialism must choose between a renunciation of the advantages of division of labor encompassing the whole earth and all peoples and the establishment of a
world-crnbracing hegemonic order. It is this fact that made Russian
Bolshevism, German Nazism, and Italian Fascism "dynamic," i.e.,
aggressive. Undcr contractual conditions empircs arc dissolved into
a loose Icague of autonomous member nations. The hegemonic system
is bound to strive after the annexation of all indepcndcnt states.
T h e contractual order of society is an order of right and law. I t
is a government undcr the rule of law (Rechtsstaat) as differentiated
from the wclfare state (Wohlfahtsstnat) or paternal state. Right or
law is the complex of rules determining the orbit in which individuals
are free to act. N o such orbit is left to wards of a hegemonic society.
In the hegemonic state there is ncither right nor law; there are only
directives and regulations w-hich the director may change daily and
apply with what discrimination he pleases and which the wards must
obey. T h e wards have one freedom only: to obey without asking
questions.
3.

Calculative Action

All the praxeological categories are eternal and unchangeable as
they are uniquely determined b y the logical structure of the human
mind and by the natural conditions of man's existence. Both in acting
and in theorizing about acting, man can neither free himself from
these categories nor go beyond them. A kind of acting categorially
different from that determined by thesc categories is neither possible
nor conceivable for man. Man can never comprehend something
which would be neither action nor nonaction. There is no history of
acting; thcrc is no evolution which wouId lead from nonaction to
action; there arc no transitory stages between action and nonaction.
There is only acting and nonacting. And for evcry concrete action
all that is rigorously valid which is categorially established with regard to action in general.

Human Action

2 00

Every action can make use of ordinal numbers. For the application
of cardinal numbers and for the arithmetical computation based on
them special conditions are required. These conditions emerged in
the historicaI evolution of the contractual society. Thus the way was
opencd for computation and calculation in the planning of future
action and in establishing the effects achieved by past action. Cardinal
numbers and their use in arithmetical operations are also eternal and
immutable categories of the human mind. But their applicability to
premeditation and the rccording of action depcnds on certain conditions which were not given in the early state of human affairs, which
appeared only later, and which could possibly disappear again.
It was cognition of what is going on within a world in which action
is computable and caIcrilable that led men to elaboration of the sciences
of praxeology and economics. Economics is essentially a theory of
that scope of action in which calculation is applied or can be applied
if certain conditions are realized. No other distinction is of greater
significance, both for human life and for the study of human action,
than that between ca1culable action and noncalculable action. Modern
civilization is above all characterized by the fact that it has elaborated
a method which makes the use of arithmetic possible in a broad field
of activities. This is what people have in mind when attributing to it
the-not very expedient and often misleading-epithet of rationality.
The mental grasp and analysis of the problems present in a calculating market system were the starting point of economic thinking which finally led to general praxeological cognition. However, it
is not the consideration of this historicaI fact that makes it necessary
to start exposition of a comprehensive system of economics by an
anaIysis of the market economy and to place before this analysis an
examination of the problem of economic calculation. Not historical
nor heuristic aspects enjoin such a procedure, but the requirements
of logical and systematic rigor. The problems concerned are apparent
and practical only within the sphere of the calculating market economy. I t is only hypothetical and figurative transfer which makes
them utilizab~dfor the scrutiny of other systems of society's economic
organization which do not allow of any calculation. Economic calculation is the fundamental issue in the comprehension of all problems
commonly called economic.

a

Part Three

Economic Calczdation

XI. VALUATION W I T H O U T CALCULATION
I.

T h e Gradation of the Means

CTING man transfers the valuation of ends he aims at to the means.

A
Other things being equal, he assigns to the total amount of the
various means the same value he attaches to the end which they are

fit to bring about. For the moment we may disregard the time needed
for production of the end and its influence upon the relation between
the value of the ends and that of the means.
T h e gradation of the means is like that of the ends a process of
preferring a to b. I t is preferring and settina aside. It is manifestation
9
of a judgment that a is more intensely desired than is b. I t opens a
field for application of ordinal numbers, but it is not open t o application of cardinal nurnbers and arithmetical operations based on them.
If somebody gives me the choice among three tickets entitling one
to attend the operas Ai'da, Falstafl, and Traz'iata and I take, if I can
only take one of them, Ai'da, and if I can take one more, Falstaff also,
I have made a choice. That means: under given conditions I prefer
Aida and Falstafl to Trauiata; if I could only choose one of them, I
would prefer Ai'da and renounce Falstafl. If I call the admission t o
AYda a, that to Falstaff b and that to Travinta c , I can say: I prefer a
to b and b to c.
T h e immediate goal of acting is frequently the acquisition of
countable and measurable supplies of tangible things. Then acting
man has t o choose between countable quantities; he prefers, for example, 15 r to 7 p; but if he had to choose between I 5 r and 8 p, he
might prefer 8 p. W e can express this state of affairs by declaring that
he values I j r less than 8 p, but higher than 7 p. This is tantamount
to the statement that he prefers a to b and b to c. T h e substitution of
8 p for a, of 15 r for b and of 7 p for c changes neither the meaning of
the statement nor the fact that it describes. I t certainly does not render
reckoning with cardinal numbers possible. It. does not open a field
for economic calculation and the mental operations based upon such
calculation.

Human Action

2.

T h e Barter-Fiction of the Elementary Theory
of Value and Priccs

T h e elaboration of economic theory is heuristically dependent on
the logical processes of reckoning to such an extent that the economists failed to realize the fundamental problem involved in the
methods of economic calculation. They wcre prone to take economic
calculation as a matter of course; they did not see that it is not an
ultimate given, but a derivative requiring reduction to more elementary phenomena. They misconstrued economic calculation. T h e y took
it for a category of all human action and ignored the fact that it is only
a category inherent in acting under special conditions. They were
fuIly aware of the fact that interpersonal exchange, and consequently
market exchange effected h y the intermediary of a common medium
of exchange-money, and therefore prices, are special features of a
certain state of society's economic organization which did not exist in
primitive civilizations and could possibly disappear in the further
course of historical change.= But they did not comprehend that
money prices are the only vehicle of economic calculation. Thus most
of their studics are of little use. Even the writings of the most eminent
economists are vitiated to some extent by the fallacies implied in
their ideas about economic calculation.
'rhe modcrn theory of value and prices shows how the choices of
individuals, their preferring of some things and setting aside of other
things, result, in the sphcre of interpersonal exchange, in the emergence of market price^.^ These masterful expositions are unsatisfactory in some minor points and disfigured by unsuitable expressions.
But they are essentially irrefutable. As far as they need to be amended,
it must he done by a consistent elaboration of the fundamental
thoughts of thcir authors rather than by a refutation of their reason-

iilg.
In order to trace back the phenomena of the marlret to the universal category of preferring n to b, the elementary theory of value
and prices is bound to use some imaginary constructions. T h e use of
imaginary constructions to which nothing corresponds in reality is
an indispensable tool of thinking. N o other method would have contributed anything to the interpretation of reality. But one of the most
I . T h e Gcrman Historical School expressed this by asserting that private
ownership of the means of production, market exchange, and money are "historical caterories."
2. Cf. es@cially Eugen von BGhm-Bawerk, Kapital and Kapitalzins, Pt. 11, Bk.
111.

Valuation Without Calculation

203

important problems of science is to avoid the fallacies which ill-considered employment of such constructions can entail.
The elementary theory of value and prices employs, apart from
other imaginary constructions to be dealt with later,3 the construction
of a market in which all transactions are performed in direct exchange.
There is no money; goods and services are directly bartered against
other goods and services. This imaginary construction is necessary.
One must disregard the intermediary role played by money in order
t o realize that what is ultimately exchanged is always economic goods
of the first order against other such goods. Money is nothing but a
medium of interpersonal exchange. But one must carefully guard oneself against the delusions which this construction of a market with
direct exchange can easily engender.
A serious blunder that owes its origin and its tenacity to a misinterpretation of this imaginary construction was the assumption that
the medium of exchange is a neutral factor only. According to this
opinion the only difference between direct and indirect exchange
was that only in the latter was a medium of exchange used. The interpolation of money into the transaction, it was asserted, did not
affect the main features of the business. One did not ignore the fact
that in the course of history tremendous alterations in the purchasing
power of money have occurred and that these fluctuations often convulsed the whole system of exchange. But it was believed that such
events were exceptional facts caused by inappropriate policies. Only
"bad" money can bring about such disarrangements. In addition
people misunderstood the causes and effects of these disturbances.
They tacitly assumed that changes in purchasing power occur with
regard to all goods and services at the same time and to the same
extent. This is, of course, what the fable of money's neutrality implies. T h e whole theory of catallactics, it was held, can be elaborated
under the assumption that there is direct exchange only. If this is
once achieved, the only thing to be added is the "simple" insertion
of money ternx into the complex of theorems concerning direct exchange. However, this final completion of the catallactic system was
considered of minor importance only. It was not believed that it
could alter anything essential in the structure of economic teachings.
The main task of economics was study of direct exchange. What remained to be done besides this was at best only a scrutiny of the problems of "bad" money.
Complying with this opinion economists neglected to lay due
stress upon the problems of indirect exchange. Their treatment of
monetary problems was superficial; it was only loosely connectcd with
3. See below, pp. 237-257.

204
Human Action
the main body of their scrutiny of the market process. About the turn
of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the problems of indirect
exchange were by and large relegated to a subordinate place. There
were treatises oh catallactics which dealt only incidentally and
cursorily with monetary matters, and there were books on currency
and banking which did not even attempt to integrate their subject
into thc structure of a catallactic system. At the universities of the
Anglo-Saxon countries there were separate chairs for economics and
for currency and banking, and at most of the German universities
monetary problcms were almost entirely di~regarded.~
Only later
economists realized that some of the most important and most intricate problems of catallactics are to be found in the field of indirect
exchange and that an economic theory which does not pay fuIl regard to them is lamentably defective. T h e coming into vogue of investigations concerning the relation between the "natural rate of
interest" and the "money rate of interest," the ascendancy of the
monetary theory of the trade cycle, and the entire demolition of the
doctrine of the simultaneousness and evenness of the changes in the
purchasing power of money were marks of the new tenor of economic thought. Of course, these new ideas were essentially a continuation of the work gloriously begun by David Humc, the British Currency School, John Stuart Mill and ~ a i r n e s .
still more detrimental was a second error which emerged from the
careless use of the imaginary construction of a market with direct
exchange.
A n inveterate fallacy asserted that things and services exchanged
are of equal value. Value was considered as objective, as an intrinsic
quality inherent in things and not mcreIy as the expression of various
pcoplc's eagerness to acquire them. People, it was assumed, first established the magnitude of value proper to goods and serviccs b y an
act of measurement and then procecdcd to barter them against quantities of goods and services of the same amount of value. This fallacy
frustrated Aristotle's approach to economic problems and, for almost two thousand years, the reasoning of all those for whom Aris4. Neglect of the problems of indirect exchange was certainly influenced by
political prepossessions. People did not want to give up the thesis according to
which economic depressions are an evil inherent in the capitalist mode of production and are in no way caused by attempts t o lower the rate of interest by
credit expansion. Fashionable teachers of economics deemed it "unscientific" to
explain depressions as a phenomenon originating "only" out of events in the
sphere of money and credit. There were even surveys of the history of business
cycle theory which omitted any discussion of the monetary thesis. Cf., eg., Ernst
von Hcrgmann, Geschichte der nationalokonomischen Krisentheorien (Stuttgart,
I 895).

Vdzmion Without Calculat2"on

205

totle's opinions were authoritative. It seriously vitiated the marvelous
achievements of the classical economists and rendered the writings of
their epigones, especially those of Marx and the Marxian school, entirely futile. The basis of modern cconomics is the cognition that it is
precisely the disparity in the value attached to the objects exchanged
that results in their being exchanged. People buy and sell only because they appraise the things given up less than those received. Thus
the notion of a measurement of value is vain. An act of exchange is
neither preceded nor accompanied by any process which could be
called a measuring of value. An individual may attach the same value
t o two things; but then no exchange can result. But if there is a
diversity in valuation, all that can be asserted with regard to it is
that one a is valued higher, that it is preferred to one 6. Values and
valuations are intensive quantities and not extensive quantities. They
are not susceptible to mental grasp by the application of cardinal
numbers.
However, the spurious idea that values are measurable and arc really
measured in the conduct of economic transactions was so deeply
rooted that even eminent economists fell victim to the fallacy implied. Even Friedrich von Wieser and Irving Fisher took it for granted
that there must be something like measurement of value and that economics must be able to indicate and to explain the method by which
such measurement is effected.Wost of the lesser economists simply
maintained that money serves "as a measure of valucs."
Now, we must realize that valuing means to prefer a to b. There is
-logically, epistemologically, psychologically, and praxeologically
--only one pattern of preferring. It does not matter whether a lover
prefers one girl to other girls, a man one fricnd to other people, an
amateur one painting to other paintings, or a consumer a loaf of
bread to a piece of candy. Preferring always means t o love or to desire a more than b. Just as there is no standard and no measurement of
sexual love, of friendship and sympathy, and of aesthetic enjoyment,
so there is no measurement of the value of commodities. If a man
exchanges two pounds of butter for a shirt, all that we can assert
with regard to this transaction is that he-at the instant of the transaction and under the conditions which this instant offers to him-prefers one shirt to two pounds of butter. It is certain that every act of
preferring is characterized by a definite psychic intensity of the
feelings it implies. There are grades in the intensity of the desire to
5. For a critical analysis and refutation of Fisher's argument, cf. Mises, The
Theory of Money and Credit, trans. b y H. E. Batson (London, 1934), ?p 42-44;
for the same with regard to Wieser's argument, Mises, Nationalokonomre
(Geneva, ~gqo),pp. 192-194.

2 06

Human Action

attain a definite goal and this intensity determines the psychic profit
which the successful action brings to the acting individual. But
psychic quantities can only be felt. T h e y are entirely personal, and
there is no semantic means t o express their intensity and to convey
information about them to other people.
Thcre is n o method available to construct a unit of value. Let us
remember that. two units of a homogeneous supply are necessarily
valued differently. T h e value attached t o the nth ~ m i tis Iower than
that attached to the (n - x)th unit.
In the market society there are money prices. Economic calculation is calculation in terms of money prices. The various quantities
of goods and services enter into this calculation with the amount
of moncy for which thcy are bought and sold on the market or for
which thcy could prospectively be bought and sold. It is a fictitious
assumption that an isolated self-sufficient individual or the general
manager of a socialist system, i.e., a system in which there is no marlrct f o r means of production, could calculate. There is no way which
could lead one from the money computation of a market economy
to any kind of computation in a nonmarltet systcm.

The Theory of Value and Socialism
Socialists, Institutionalists and the Historical School have blamed
cconornists for having employed the imaginary construction of an isolated
individual's thinking and acting. This Robinson Crusoe pattern, it is asserted, is of no use for the study of the conditions of a market economy.
The rebuke is somewhat justified. Imaginary constructions of an isolated
individuaI and of a planned economy without market exchange become
utilizable only through the implication of the fictitious assumption, selfcontradictory in thought and contrary to reality, that economic calculation is possible also within a system without a market for the means of
production.
It was certainly a serious blunder that economists did not become aware
of this difference between the conditions of a market economy and a nonmarkct economy. Yet the socialists had little reason for criticizing this fault.
For it consisted precisely in thc fact that the economists tacitly implied the
assumption that a socialist order of society could also resort to economic
calculation and that thcy thus asserted the possibility of the realization of
the socialist plans.
The classical economists and their epigones could not, of course, recognize the problems involved. If it were true that the value of things is
determined by the quantity of labor required for their production or reproduction, then there is no further problem of economic calculation. The
supporters of the labor theory of value cannot be blamed for having misconstrued the problems of a socialist system. Their fateful failure was their

Valuation Without Calculation

207

untenable doctrine of value. That some of them were ready to consider
the imaginary construction of a socialist economy as a useful and realizable
pattern for a thorough reform of social organization did not contradict the
essential content of their theoretical analysis. But it was different with subjective catallactics. It was unpardonable for the modern economists to have
failed to recognize the problems involved.
Wieser was right when he once declared that many economists have
unwittingly dealt with the value theory of communism and have on that
account neglected to elaborate that of the present state of society.= It is
tragic that he himself did not avoid this failure.
The illusion that a rational order of economic management is possible
in a society based on public ownership of the means of production owed
its origin to the value theory of the classical economists and its tenacity
to the failure of many modern economists to think through consistently
to its ultimate conclusions thc fundamental theorem of the subjectivist
theory. Thus the socialist utopias were generated and preserved by the
shortcomings of those scliools of thought which the Marxians reject as
"an ideological disguise of the selfish class interest of the exploiting
bourgeoisie." In truth it was the errors of these schools that made the
socialist ideas thrive. This fact clearly demonstrates the emptiness of the
Marxian teachings concerning "ideologies" and its modern offshoot, the
sociology of knowledge.

3 . T h e Problem of Economic Calculation
Acting man uscs linowledge provided by the natural sciences for
the elaboration of technology, the applied sciencc of action possible
in the field of external events. Technology shows what could be
achieved if onc wanted to achieve it, and how it could be achieved
providcd people were prcparcd to employ the means indicated. With
the progress of the natural sciences technology progressed too; many
would prefer to sav that the desire to improve tcchnological methods
prompted the pr&ress of the natural sciences. T h e quantification
of the natural sciences made technology quantitative. Modern technology is esscntiaIly the applied art of quantitative prediction of the
o u k o m c of possible action. One calculates with a reasonable degree
of precision the outcome of planned actions, and one calculates in
order to arrange an action in such a way that a definite result emerges.
However, thc mere information conveyed b y technology would
suffice for the performance of calculation only if all means of production-both rnatcrial and human-couId be perfectly substituted for
one anothcr according to definite ratios, or if they all were absolutely
specific. In the former case all means of production would be fit,
6 . Cf.Friedrich von Wieser, Der natiirliche Wert (Vienna, 1 8 8 ~ )p., 60, n. 3.

2 08

Human Action

although according to different ratios, for the attainment of all ends
whatever; things would be as if only one kind of means-one kind
of economic goods of a higher order existed. In the latter case each
means could be employed for the attainment of one end only; one
would attach to each group of complementary factors of production
the value attached to the respective good of the first order. (Here
again we disregard provisionally the modifications brought about by
the time factor.) Neither of these two conditions is present in the
universe in which man acts. The means can only be substituted for one
another within narrow limits; they are more or less specific means
for the attainment of various ends. But, on the other hand, most
means are not absolutely specific; most of them are fit for various
purposes. The facts that there are different classes of means, that
most of the means are better suited for the realization of some ends,
less suited for the attainment of some other ends and absolutely useless for the production of a third group of ends, and that therefore the
various means allow for various uses, set man the tasks of aIlocating
them to those employments in which they can render the best service. Ilere computation in kind as applied by technology is of no
avail. Technology operates with countable and measurable quantities
of external things and effects; it knows causal relations between them,
but it is foreign to their relevance to human wants and desires. Its
field is that of objective use-value only. It judges all problems from
the disinterested point of view of a neutral observer of physical,
chcmical, and biologicaI events. For the notion of subjective usevalue, for the specifically human angle, and for the dilemmas of
acting man there is no room in the teachings of technology. It ignores
the economic problem: to employ the available means in such a way
that no want more urgently felt should remain unsatisfied because
the means suitable for its attainment were employed-wasted-for
the attainmcnt of a want less urgently felt. For the solution of such
problems technology and its methods of counting and measuring are
unfir. Technology reiis how a given end could be attairied by the
employment of various means which can be used together in various
combinations, or how various available means could be employed for
certain purposes. But it is at a loss to tell man which procedures he
should choose out of the infinite variety of imaginable and possible
modes of production. What acting man wants to know is how he
must employ the available means for the best possible-the most
economic-removal of felt uneasiness. But technology provides him
with nothing more than statements about causal relations between
3b 5c
. . . x n are
external things. It tells, for example, 7 a

+ + +

Valuation Without Calculation

209

liable to bring about 8 P. But although it knows the value attached by
acting man to the various goods of the first order, it cannot decide
whether this precept or any other out of the infinite multitude of
similarly constructed precepts best serves the attainment of the ends
sought by acting man. The art of engineering can establish how a
bridge must be built in order to span a river at a given point and to
carry definite loads. But it cannot answer the question whether or
not the construction of such a bridge uzould withdraw material
factors of production and labor from an employn~entin which they
could satisfy needs more urgently felt. It cannot tell whether or not
the bridge should be built at all, where it should be built, what
capacity for bearing burdens it should have, and which of the many
possibilities for its construction should be chosen. TechnoIogical
computation can establish relations between various classes of means
only to the extent that they can be substituted for one another in the
attempts to attain a definite goal. But action is bound to discover
relations among all means, however dissimilar they may be, without
any regard to the question whether or not they can replace one another in performing the same services.
Technology and the considerations derived from it would be of
little use for acting man if it were impossible to introduce into their
schemes the money prices of goods and services. The projects and
designs of engineers would be purely academic if they could not
compare input and output on a common basis. The lofty theorist in
the seclusion of his laboratory does not bother about such trifling
things; what he is searching for is causal relations between various
elements of the universe. But the practical man, eager to improve
human conditions by removing uneasiness as far as possible, must
know whether, under given conditions, what he is planning is the
best method, or even a method, to make people less uneasy. H e must
know whether what he wants to achieve will be an improvement
when compared with the present state of affairs and with the advantages to be expected from the execution of other technically realizable
projects which cannot be put into execution if the project he has in
mind absorbs the available means. Such comparisons can only be made
by the use of money prices.
Thus money becomes the vehicle of economic calculation. This is
not a separate function of money. Money is the universally used
medium of exchange, nothing else. Only because money is the common medium of exchange, because most goods and services can be
sold and bought on the market against tnonev, and onlv as far as tlxis
is the case, can men use money prices in reckoning. The exchange

t 10

Human Action

ratios between money and the various goods and services as established on the market of thc past and as expected to be established on
the market of the future are the mental tools of economic planning.
Where there are no money prices, there arc no such things as econoniic quantities. There are only various quantitative r e l a t h s between various causes and effects in the external world. There is no
means for man to find out what kind of action would best serve his
endeavors to remove uneasiness as far as possible.
There is no need to dwell upon the primitive conditions of the
household economy of self-sufficient farmers. These people performed only very simple processes of production. For them no
calculation was needed, as they could directly compare input and
output. If they wanted shirts, they grew hemp, they spun, wove,
and sewed. They could, without any calculation, easily make up
their minds whether or riot the toil and trouble expended were
compensated by the product. But for civilized mankind a return to
such a life is out of the question.

4. Economic Calculation and the Market
The quantitative treatment of economic problems must not be confused with the quantitative methods applied in dealing with the problems of the external universe of physical and chemical events. The
distinctive mark of economic calculation is that it is neither based
upon nor related to anything which could be characterized as measurement.
A process of measurement consists in the establishment of the
numerical relation of an object with regard to another object, viz.,
the unit of the measurement. The ultimate source of mcasuremcnt is
that of spatial dirncnsions. With the aid of the unit defined in reference to extension one measures energy and potentiality, the power
of a thing to bring about changes in other things and relations, and
the passing of time. A pointer-reading is directly indicative of a spatial
relation and only indirectly of other quantities. The assumption
underlying mcasurement is the immutability of the unit. The unit
of length is the rock upon which a11 measurement is based. I t is
assumed that man cannot help considering it immutable.
Thc last decades have witnessed a revolution in the traditional
epistemological setting of physics, chemistry, and mathematics. We
are on the eve of innovations whose scope cannot be foreseen. It may
be that the coming generations of physicists will have to face problems in some way similar to those with which praxeology must deal.

Valuation Without Calculation
Perhaps they will be forced to drop the idea that there is something
unaffected by cosmic changes which the observer can use as a standard of measurement. But however that may come, the logical structure of the measurement of earthly entities in the macroscopic or
molar field of physics will not alter. Measurement in the orbit of
microscopic physics too is made with meter scales, micrometers,
spectrographs-ultimately with the gross sense organs of man, the
observer and experimenter, who himself is ~ n o l a r .It~ cannot free itself from Euclidian geometry and from the notion of an unchangeable standard.
There are monetary units and there are measurable physical units
of various economic goods and of many-but not of all-services
bought and sold. But the exchange ratios which we have to deal with
are permanently fluctuating. There is nothing constant and invariable
in them. They defy any attempt to measure them. They are not facts
in the sense in which a physicist calls the estabIishment of the weight
of a quantity of copper a fact. They are historical events, expressive
of what happened once at a definiie instant and under definite circumstances. T h e same numerical exchange ratio may appear again,
but it is by no means certain whether this will really happen and, if it
happens, the question is open whether this identical result was the
outcome of preservation of the same circumstances or of a return to
them rather than the outcome of the interplay of a very different
constellation of price-determining factors. hTumbers applied by acting man in economic calculation do not refer to quantities measured
but to exchange ratios as they are expected-on the basis of understanding-to be realized on the markets of the future to which alone
all acting is directed and which alone counts for acting man.
W e are not dealing at this point of our investigation with the problem of a "quantitative science of economics," but with the analysis of
the mental processes performed by acting man in applying quantitative distinctions when planning conduct. As action is always directed
toward influencing a future state of affairs, economic calculation always deals with the future. As far as it takes past events and exchange
ratios of the past into consideration, it does so only for the sake of an
arrangement of future action.
The task which acting man wants to achieve by economic calculation is to establish the outcome of acting by contrasting input and
output. Economic calculation is either an estimate of the expected
outcome of future action or the establishment of the outcome of past
action. But the latter does not serve merely historical and didactic
7. Cf. A. Eddington, T h e Philosophy of Physical Science, pp. 7-79, 168-169.

212

Human Action

aims. Its practical meaning is to show how much one is free to consume without impairing the future capacity to produce. It is with
regard to this problem that the fundamental notions of economic
calculation-capital and income, profit and loss, spending and saving,
cost and yield-arc developed. T h e practical employment of these
notions and of all notions derived from them is inseparably linked
with the operation of a market in which goods and services of all orders are exchanged against a ~~niversalIy
used medium of exchange,
viz., money. They would be merely academic, without any relevance
for acting within'a worId with a different structure of action.

XII. T H E SPHERE O F ECONOMIC CALCULATION
I.

T h e Character of hlonctary Entries

calculation can comprehend everything that is exchanged
money.
ETheagainst
prices of goods and services are either historical data describCOKOMIC

ing past events or anticipations of probable future events. Information about a past price conveys the knowledge that one or several acts
of interpersonal exchange were effected according to this ratio. It
does not convey directly any knowledge about future prices. W e
may often assume that the market conditions which determined the
formation of prices in the recent past will not change at all or at
least not change considerably in the immediate future so that prices
too w-ill remain unchanged or change only slightly. Such expectations
are reasonable if the prices concerned were the result of the interaction
of many people ready to buy or to sell provided the exchange ratios
seemed propitious to them and if the market situation was not influenced by conditions which are considered as accidental, extraordinary, and not likely to return. However, the main task of economic
calculation is not to deal with the problems of unchanging or only
slightly changing market situations and prices, but to deal with
change. The acting individual either anticipates changes which will
occur without his own interference and wants to adjust his actions
to this anticipated state of affairs; or hc wants to embark upon a project which will change conditions even if no other factors produce
a change. The prices of the past are for him merely starting points in
his endeavors to anticipate future prices.
Historians and statisticians content themselves with prices of the
past. Practical man looks at the prices of the future, be it only the
immediate future of the next hour, day, or month. For him the prices
of the past are merely a help in anticipating future prices. hTotonly
in his preliminary calculation of the expected outcome of planned
action, but no less in his attempts to establish the result of his past
transactions, he is primarily concerned with future prices.
In balance sheets and in profit-and-loss statements the result of
past action becomes visible as the difference between the money equiv-

2'4
Human Action
alent of funds owned (totaI assets minus totaI liabilities) at the
beginning and at the end of the period reported, and as the difference
between the money equivalent of costs incurred and gross proceeds
earned. In such statements it is necessary to enter the estimated money
equivalent of all assets and liabilities other than cash. These items
should be appraised according to the prices at which they could probably be sold in the future or, as is especially the case with equipment
for production processes, in reference to the prices to be expected in
the sale of merchandise manufactured with their aid. However, old
business customs and the provisions of commercial law and of the
tax laws have brought about a deviation from sound principles of
accounting which aim merely at the best attainable degree of correctness. These customs and laws are not so much concerned with
correctness in balance sheets and profit-and-loss statements as with
the pursuit of other aims. Comnlercial legislation aims at a method
of accounting which couId indirectly protect creditors against loss.
It tends more or less to an appraisal of assets below their estimated
market value in order to make the net profit and the total funds owned
appear smaller than they really arc. Thus a safety margin is created
which reduces the danger that, to the prejudice of creditors, too
much might be withdrawn from the firm as alleged profit and that an
already insolvent firm might go on untiI it had exhausted the means
available for the satisfaction of its creditors. Contrariwise tax laws
often tend toward a method of computation which makes earnings
appear higher than an unbiased method would. T h e idea is to raise
effective tax rates without ~nakingthis raise visible in the nominal
tax rate schedules. We must therefore distinguish between economic
calculation as it is practiced by businessmen planning future transactions and those computations of business facts which serve other
purposes. The determination of taxes due and economic calculation
are two different things. If a law imposing a tax upon the keeping of
domestic servants prescribes that one male servant should be counted
as two female servants, nobody would interpret such a provision as
anything other than a method for determining the amount of tax
die. Likewise if an inheritance tax law prescribes that securities
should be appraised at the stock market quotation on the day of the
decgdent's death, we are merely provided with a way of determining
the amount of the tax.
T h e duly kept accounts in a system of correct bookkeeping are
accurate as to dollars and cents. They display an impressive precision,
and the numerical exactitude of their items seems to remove ail doubts.
In fact, the most important figures they contain arc speculative antic-

The Sphere of Economic Calculation
ipations of future market constellations. It is a mistake to compare
the items of any commercial account to the items used in purely
technological reckoning, e.g., in the design for the construction of a
machine. The engineer-as far as he attends to the technological side
of his job--applies only numerical relations established by the methods of the experimental natural sciences; the businessman cannot
avoid numerical terms which are the outcome of his understanding of
future human conduct. The main thing in balance sheets and in profitand-loss statements is the evaluation of assets and Iiabilities not embodied in cash. All such balances and statements are virtually interim
balances and interim statements. They describe as well as possible the
state of affairs at an arbitrarily chosen instant while life and action
go on and do not stop. It is possible to wind up individual business
units, but the whole system of social production never ceases. Nor
are the assets and liabilities consisting in cash exempt from the indeterminacy inherent in all business accounting items. They depend
on the future constellation of the market no less than any item of inventory or equipment. The numerical exactitude of business accounts
and calculations must not prevent us from realizing the uncertainty
and speculative character of their items and of all computations based
on them.
Yet, these facts do not detract from the efficiency of economic calculation. Economic calculation is as efficient as it can be. No reform
could add to its efficiency. It renders to acting man all the services
which he can obtain from numerical computation. I t is, of course, not
a means of knowing future conditions with certainty, and it does nor
deprive action of its speculative character. But this can be considered
a deficiency only by those who do not come to recognize the facts
that life is not rigid, that all things are perpetually fluctuating, and
that men have no certain knowledge about the future.
It is not the task of economic calculation to expand man's information about future conditions. Its task is to adjust his actions as well
as possible to his present opinion concerning want-satisfaction in the
future. For this purpose acting man needs a method of computation,
and computation requires a common denominator to which all items
entered are to be referable. T h e common denominator of economic
calculation is money.
2.

T h e Limits of Economic Calculation

Economic calculation cannot comprehend things which are not
sold and bought against money.

2 16

Human Action

There are things which are not for sale and for whose acquisition
sacrifices other than money and money's worth must be expended.
He who wants to train himself for great achievements must employ
many means, some of which may require expenditure of money.
But the essential things to be devoted to such an endeavor are not
purchasable. Honor, virtue, glory, and likewise vigor, health, and
life itself play a role in action both as means and as ends; but they do
not enter into economic calculation.
There are things which cannot at all be evaluated in money, and
there arc other things which can be appraised in money only with
regard to a fraction of the value assigned to them. T h e appraisal of an
old building must disregard its artistic and historical eminence as far
as these qualities are not a source of proceeds in money or goods
vendible. What touches a man's heart only and does not induce other
people to make sacrifices for its attainment remains outside the pale
of economic caIculation.
IHowever, all this does not in the least impair the usefulness of
econonlic calculation. Those things which do not enter into the items
of accountancy and calculation are either ends or goods of the first
order. No calculation is required to acknowledge them fully and
to make due allowance for them. All that acting man needs in order
to make his choice is to contrast them with the total amount of costs
their acquisition or preservation requires. Let us assume that a town
council has to decide between two water supply projects. One of
them implies the demolition of a historical landmark, while the other
at the cost of an increase in money expenditure spares this landmark. The fact that the feelings which recommend the conservation of the monument cannot be estimated in a sum of money does
not in any way impede the councilmen's decision. The values that
are not reflected in any monetary exchange ratio are, on the contrary,
by this very fact Iifted into a particular position which makes the
decision rather easier. No complaint is less justified than the larnentation that the computation methods of the market do not comprehend
things not vendible. Moral and aesthetic values do not suffer any
damage on account of this fact.
Money, money prices, market transactions, and economic calculation based upon them are the main targets of criticism. Loquacious
sermonizers disparage Western civilization as a mean system of mongering and peddling. CompIacency, self-righteousness, and hypocrisy
exult in scorning the "dollar-philosophy" of our age. Neurotic reformers, mentally unbalanced literati, and ambitious demagogues
take pleasure in indicting "rationality" and in preaching the gospel

The Sphere of Economic Calculation

217

of the "irrational." In the eyes of these babblers money and calculation are the source of the most serious evils. However, the fact that
men have developed a method of ascertaining as far as possible the
expediency of their actions and of removing uneasiness in the most
practical and cconomic way does not prevcnt anybody from arranging his conduct according to the principle he considers to be right.
The "materialism" of the stock cxchange and of business accountancy
does not hinder anybody from living up to the standards of Thomas
A Kempis or from dying for a noble cause. Thc fact that the masses
prefer detective stories to poetry and that it therefore pays better
to write the formcr than the lattcr, is not caused by the use of money
arid monetary accounting. It is not the fault of money that there are
gangsters, tliieves, murderers, prostitutes, corruptible officials and
judges. I t is not true that honesty does not "pay." It pays for those
who prefer fidelity to what they consider to be right to the advantages which they could derive from a differcnt attitude.
Other critics of economic calcuIation fail to realize that it is a
net hod available only to people acting in the economic system of the
division of labor in a social order based upon private ownership of
the means of production. It can only serve thc considerations of individuals or groups of individuals operating in the institutional setting
of this social order. It is consequently a calculation of private profits
and not of "social welfare." This means that the prices of the market
are the ultimate fact for economic calculation. It cannot be applied
for considerations whose standard is not the demand of the consumers
as manifested on the market but the hypotheticaI valuations of a
dictatorial body managing all national or earthly affairs. H e who
seeks to judge actions from the point of view of a pretended "social
value," i.e., from the point of view of the "whole society," and to
criticize them by comparison with the events in an imaginary socialist
system in which his own will is supreme, has no use for economic calculation. Economic calculation in terms of moncy prices is the calcu!ation of eiitieprericurs produziiig for the zoiisiimcrs of a market
society. It is of no avail for other tasks.
H e who wants to employ economic calculation must not look at
affairs in the manner of a despotic mind. Prices can be used for calculation by the entrepreneurs, capitalists, landowners, and wage earners
of a capitalist society. For rnattcrs beyond the pursuits of these categories it is inadequate. It is nonsensical to evaluate in money objects
which are not negotiated on the market and to empIoy in calculations
arbitrary itcms which do not refer to reality. T h e law determines
the amount which ought to be paid as indemnification for having

218

Human Action

caused a man's death. But the prescription enacted for the determination of thc amends due does not mcan that there is a price for human
life. Where there is slavcry, there are marlrct prices of slaves. Where
there is no slavery man, human life, and health are rcs extra commercium. In a society of free men the preservation of life and health
are ends, not means. They do not enter into any process of accounting
means.
I t is possible to determine in terms of money prices the sum of the
income or thc wcalth of a number of people. But it is nonsensical to
reckon national income or national wealth. As soon as we embark
upon considerations foreign to the reasoning of a man operating within
the palc of a market society, we are no longer helped b y monetary
calculation methods. T h e attcrnpts to dctermine in money the wealth
of a nation or of the whole of mankind are as childish as the mystic
efforts to solve the riddles of the universe by worrying about the
dimensions of the pyramid of Cheops. If a business calculation values
a supply of potatoes at $roo, the idea is that it will be possible to sell
it or to replace it against this sum. If a whole entrepreneurial unit is
estimated $r,ooo,ooo, it means that one expects to sell it for this
amount. But what is the meaning of the items in a statement of a
nation's total wealth? What is the meaning of the computation's
final result? What must be entered into it and what is to be left outside? Is it correct or not to encIose the "value" of the country's climate
and thc pcople's innate abilities and acquired skill? T h e businessman
can convert his property into money, but a nation cannot.
The money equivalcnts as used in acting and in economic calculation are money prices, i.e., exchange ratios between money and other
goods and services. T h e prices are not measured in money; they
consist in money. Prices are cither prices of the past or expected prices
of the future. A price is necessarily a historical fact either of the past
or of the future. There is nothing in prices which permits one to
liken them to the measurement of physical and chemical phenomena.

3 . The Changeability of Prices
Exchange ratios are subject to perpetual change because the conditions which produce them are perpetually changing. The value that
an individual attaches both to money and to various goods and services is the outcome of a moment's choice. Every later instant may
generate something new and bring about other considerations and
valuations. N o t that prices are fluctuating, but that they do not alter

The Sphere of Economic Calculation

219

more quickly could fairly be deemed a problem requiring explanation.
DaiIy experience teaches people that the exchange ratios of the
market are mutable. One would assume that their ideas about prices
would take full account of this fact. Nevertheless all popular notions
of production and consumption, marketing and prices are more or
less contaminated by a vague and contradictory notion of price
rigidity. T h e layman is prone to consider the preservation of yesterday's price structure both as normal and as fair, and to condemn
changes in the exchange ratios as a violation of the rules of nature and
of justice.
It would be a mistake to explain these popular beliefs as a precipitate of old opinions conceived in earlier ages of more stable conditions of production and marketing, It is questionable whether or not
prices were less changeable in those older days. O n the contrary,
it could rather be asserted that the merger of local markets into
Iarger national markets, the finaI emergence of a world embracing
world market, and the evolution of commerce aiming at continuously
supplying the consumers have made price changes less frcquent and
less sharp. In precapitalistic times there was more stability in technological methods of production, but there was much more irregularity
in supplying the various local ~narkctsand in adjusting supply to
their changing demands. But even if it were true that prices were
somewhat more stable in a remote past, it would he of little avail for
our age. T h e popular notions about money and money prices are
not derived from ideas formed in the past. It would be wrong to
interpret them as atavistic remnants. Under modern conditions every
individual is daily faced with so many problems of buying and selling that we are right in assuming that his thinking abou; these matters
is not simply a thoughtless reception of traditional ideas.
I t is easy to understand why those whose short-run interests are
hurt by a change in prices resent such changes, emphasize, that the
previous prices were not only fairer but also more normal, and maintain that price stability is in conformity with the laws of nature and
of morality. But every change in prices furthers the short-run interests of other people. Those favored will certainly not be prompted
b y the urge to stress the fairness and normalcy of price rigiditv.
ATeitheratavistic reminiscences nor the state of selfish group interests can explain the popularity of the idea of price stability. Its roots
are to be seen in the fact that notions concerning social relations have
been constructed according to the pattern of the natural sciences.
T h e economists and sociologists who aimed at shaping the social

220

Human Action

sciences according to the pattern of physics or physiology only
indulged in a way of thinking which popular fallacies had adopted
long before.
Even the classical economists were slow to free themselves from
this error. With them value was something objective, ix., a phenomenon of the external world and a quality inherent in things and therefore measurable. They utterly failed to comprehend the pureIy human and voluntaristic character of value judgments. As far as we can
see today it was Samuel Bailey who first discloscd what is going on
in preferring one thing to another.' But his book was overlooked as
were the writings of other precursors of the subjective theory of value.
It is not only a task of economic science to discard the errors concerning measurability in the field of action. It is no less a task of economic policy. For the failures of prcscnt-day economic policies are
to some extent due to the lamentable confusion brought about by
the idea that there is something fixed and therefore measurable in
interhuman relations.

4. Stabilization
An outgrowth of all these errors is the idea of stabilization.
Shortcomings in the governments' handling of monetary matters
and the disastrous consequences of policies aimed at lowering the
rate of interest and at encouraging business activities through credit
expansion gave birth to the ideas which finally generated the slogan
"stabilization." One can explain its emergence and its popular appeal,
one can understand it as the fruit of the last hundred and fifty years'
history of currency and banking, one can, as it were, plead extenuating circumstances for the error invohed. But no such sympathetic
appreciation can render its fallacies any more tenable.
Stability, the establishment of which the program of stabilization
aims at, is an empty and contradictory notion. The urge toward
action, i.e., improvement of the conditions of iife, is inborn in man.
Man himself changes from moment to momcnt and his valuations,
volitions, and acts change with him. In the realm of action there is
nothing perpetual but change. There is no fixed point in this ceaseless fluctuation other than the eternal aprioristic categories of action.
It is vain to sever valuation and action from man's unsteadiness and the
changcability of his conduct and to argue as if there were in the
r . Cf. Samuel Bailey, A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, Measures and
Causes of Values. London, 1825. No. 7 in Series of Reprints of Scarce Tracts in
Economics and Political Science, London School of Economics (London, 1931).

The Sphere of Economic Cnlculation
universe eternal values independent of human value judgments and
suitable to serve as a yardstick for the appraisal of real actions2
All methods suggested for a measurement of the changes in the
monetary unit's purchasing power are more or less unwittingly
founded on the illusory image of an eternal and immutable being who
determines by the application of an immutable standard the quantity
of satisfaction which a unit of money conveys to him. It is a poor
justification of this ill-thought idea that what is wanted is merely
to measure changes in the ~urchasingpower of money. The crux
of the stability notion lies precisely in this concept of p~zrchasing
power. The layman, laboring under the ideas of physics, once considered money as a yardstick of prices. H e believed that fluctuations
of exchange ratios occur only in the reIations between the various
commodities and services and not also in the relation between money
and the "totality" of goods and services. Later, people reversed the
argument. It was no longer money to which constancy of value was
attributed, but the "totality" of things vendible and purchasable.
Pcople began to devise methods for working up complexes of commodity units to bc contrasted to the monetary unit. Eagerness to
find indexes for the measurement of purchasing power silenced all
scruples. Both the doubtfulness and the incomparability of the price
records employed and the arbitrary character of the procedures used
for the computation of averages were disregarded.
Irving Fisher, the eminent economist, who was the champion of
the American stabilization movement, contrasts with the dollar a
basket containing all the goods the housewife buys on the market for
the current provision of her household. In the proportion in which
the amount of money required for the purchase of the content of
this basket changes, the purchasing power of the dollar has changed.
The goal assigned to the policy of stabilization is the preservation of
the immutability of this money expenditur~.~
This would be all right
if the housewife and her imaginary basket were constant elements, if
the basket were always to contain the same goods and the same quantity of each and if the role which this assortment of goods plays in
the family's lifc were not to change. But we are living in a world in
which none of these conditions is realized.
First of all there is the fact that the quality of the commodities
produced and consumed changes continuously. It is a mistake to
2. For the propensity of the mind to view rigidity and unchangeability as the
essential thing and change and motion as the accidental, cf. Bergson, La Pense'e
et le mouvant, pp. 85 ff.
3. Cf. Irving Fisher, The Money Illusion (New York, r928), pp. 1 ~ 2 0 .

222

Human Action

identify wheat with wheat, not to speak of shoes, hats, and other
manufactures. The great price differences in the synchronous sales
of commodities which mundane speech and statistics arrange in the
same class clearly evidence this truism. An idiomatic expression asserts that two peas are alike; but buyers and sellers distinguish various
qualities and grades of peas. A comparison of prices paid at different
places or at different dates for commodities which technology or
statistics call by the same name, is useless if it is not certain that their
qualities-but for the place difference-are perfectly the same. Quality means in this connection: all those properties to which the buyers
and would-be-buyers pay heed. The mere fact that the quality df all
goods and services of the first order is subject to change explodes one
of the fundamental assumptiqns of all index number methods. It is
irrelevant that a limited amount of goods of the higher ordersespecially metals and chemicals which can be uniquely determined
by a formula-are liable to a precise description of their characteristic
features. A measurement of purchasing power wouId have to rely
upon the prices of the goods and services of the first order and, what
is more, of all of them. T o employ the prices of the producers' goods
is not hclpful because it could not avoid counting the various stages
of the production of one and the same consumers' good several times
and thus falsifying the result. A restriction to a group of selected goods
would be quite arbitrary and therefore vicious.
But even apart from all these insurmountable obstacles the task
would remain insoluble. For not only do the technological features of
commodities change and new kinds of goods appear while many old
ones disappear. Valuations change too, and they cause changes in
demand and production. The assumptions of the measurement doctrine would require men whose wants and valuations are rigid. Only
if people were to value the same things always in the same way, could
we consider price changes as expressive of changes in the power of
rnoney to buy things.
As it is impossible to establish the total amount of rnoney spent
at a given fraction of time for consumers' goods, statisticians must
rely upon the prices paid for individual commodities. This raises two
further problems for which there is no apodictic solution. It becomes
necessary to attach to the various commodities coefficients of importance. It would be manifestly wrong to let the prices of various
commodities enter into the computation without taking into account
the different roles they play in the total system of the individuals'
households. But the establishment of such proper weighting is again
arbitrary. Secondly, it becomes necessary to compute averages out

The Sphere of Economic Calculation

223

of the data collected and adjusted. But there exist different methods
for the computation of averages. There are the arithmetic, the geometric, the harmonic averages, there is the quasi-average Imown as
the median. Each of them leads to different results. None of them
can be recognized as the unique way to attain a logically unassailable
answer. T h e decision in favor of one of these methods of computation
is arbitrary.
If all human conditions were unchangeable, if all people were always to repeat the same actions because their uneasiness and their
ideas about its rcmoval were constant, or if we wcre in a position to
assume that changes in these factors occurring with some individuals
or groups are always outweighed by opposite changes with other
individuals or groups and therefore do not affect total demand and
total supply, we would live in a world of stability. But the idea that
in such a world money's purchasing power could change is,contradictory. As will be shown later, changes in the purchasing power of
money must necessarily affect the prices of different commodities
and services at different times and to diffcrcnt extents; they tnust consequently bring about changes in demand and supply, in production
and cons~mption.~
The idea implied in the inappropriate term level
of prices, as if-other
things being equal-all prices could rise or
drop cvenly, is untenable. Other things cannot remain equal if the
purchasing power of money changes.
I n the field of praxeology and economics no sense can be given to
the notion of measurement. In the hypothetical state of rigid conditions there are no changes to be measured. In the actual world of
change there are no fixed points, dimensions, or relations which could
serve as a standard. The monetary unit's purchasing power never
changes evenly with regard to all things vendible and purchasable.
T h e notions of stability and stabilization are empty if they do not
refer to a state of rigidity and its preservation. However this state of
rigidity cannot even be thought out consistently to its ultimate logical
consequences; stiii iess can it be r e a i i ~ e d . ~
TV'here there is action, there
is change. Action is a lever of change.
The prctentious solemnity which statisticians and statistical bureaus
display in computing indexes of purchasing powcr and cost of living
is out of place. These index numbers are at best rather crude and
inaccurate illustrations of changes which have occurred. In periods
of slow alterations in the relation between the supply of and the demand for money they do not convey any information at all. In
4. See below, pp. 408-410.
5. Cf. below, pp. 249-251.

periods of inflation and consequently of sharp price changes they
provide a rough image of events which every individual experiences
in his daily life. A judicious housewife knows much more about price
changes as far as they affect her own household than the statistical
averages can tell. She has little use for compntations disregarding
changes both in quality and in the amount of goods which she is
able or permitted to buy at the prices entering into the computation.
If she "measures" the changes for her personal appreciation by taking the prices of only two or three commodities as a yardstick, she
is no less "scientific" and no more arbitrary than the sophisticated
mathematicians in choosing their methods for the manipulation of
the data of the market.
In practical life nobody lets himself be fooled by index numbers.
Nobody agrees with the fiction that they are to be considered as
measurempts. Where quantities are measured, all further doubts
and disagreements concerning their dimensions cease. These questions are settled. Nobody ventures to argue with the ~neteorologists
about their measurements of temperature, humidity, atmospheric
pressure, and other meteorological data. But on the other hand nobody acquiesces in an index number if he does not expect a personal
advantage from its acknowledgment by public opinion. T h e establishment of index numbers does not settle disputes; it merely shifts
them into a field in which the dash of antagonistic opinions and interests is irreconcilable.
Human action originates change. As far as there is human action
there is no stability, but ceaseless alteration. T h e historical process
is a sequence of changes. I t is beyond the power of man to stop it and
to bring about an age of stability in which all history comes to a
standstill. I t is man's nature to strive after improvement, to beget new
ideas, and to rearrange the conditions of his life according to these
ideas.
T h e prices of the market are historical facts expressive of a state
of affairs that prevailed at a definite instant of the irreversible historical
process. In the praxeological orbit the concept of measurement does
not make any sense. In the imaginary-and, of course, unrealizablestate of rigidity and stability there are no changes t o be measured. Tn
the actual world of permanent change there are no fixed points, objects, qualities or relations with regard to which changes could be
measured.

The Sphere of Econowic Calculatio~z
5. T h e Root of the Stabilization Idea
Econo~niccalculation does not require monetary stability in the
sense in which this term is used by the champions of the stabilization
movement. The fact that rigidity in the monetary unit's purchasing
power is unthinkable and unrealizable does not impair the methods
of economic calculation. What economic calculation requires is a
monetary system whose functioning is not sabotaged by government
interference. The endeavors to expand the quantity of money in circulation either in order to increase the government's capacity to spend
or in order to bring about a temporary lowering of the rate of interest disintegrate all currency matters and derange economic calculation. The first aim of monctary policy must be t o prevent governments from embarking upon inflation and from creating conditions
which encourage credit expansion on the part of banks. But this
program is very different from the confused and self-contradictory
program of stabilizing purchasing power.
For the sake of economic calculation all that is needed is to avoid
great and abrupt Auctuations in the supply of money. Gold and, up
to the middle of the nineteenth century, silver served very well all the
purposes of economic calculation. Changes in the relation between
the supply of and the demand for the precious metals and the resulting alterations in purchasing power went on so slowly that the
entrepreneur's economic calculation could disregard them without
going too far afield. Precision is unattainable in economic calculation
quite apart from the shortcomings emanating from not paying due
consideration to monetary change^.^ The planning businessman cannot help employing data concerning the unknown future; he deals
with future prices and future costs of production. Accounting and
bookkeeping in their endeavors to establish the result of past action
are in the same position as far as they rely upon the estimation of
fixed equipment, inventories, and receivables. In spite of all these
uncertainties economic calculation can achieve its tasks. For these
uncertainties do not stem from deficiencies of the system of calculation. They are inherent in the essence of acting that always deals with
the uncertain future.
The idea of rendering purchasing power stable did not originate
6. Incidentally, no practical calculation can ever be precise. The formu1a

underlying the process of calculation may be exact; the calculation itself depends
on the approximate establishment of quantities and is therefore necessarily inaccurate. Economics is, as has been shown above (p. 39), an exact science of
real things. But as soon as price data are introduced into the chain of thought,
exactitude is abandoned and economic history is substituted for economic theory

226

Human Action

from endeavors to make economic calculation more correct. Its
source is the wish to create a sphere withdrawn from the ceaseless
flux of human affairs, a realm which the historical process does not
affect. Endowments which were designed to provide in perpetuity
for an ecclesiastic body, for a charitable institution, or for a family
were long established in land or in disbursement of agricultural products in ltind. Latcr annuities to be settled in money were added. Endowers and beneficiaries expected that an annuity determined in
terms of a definite amount of precious metals would not be affected
by changes in econon~icconditions. But these hopes were iI1usory.
Later generations learned that the plans of their ancestors were not
reahzed. Stimulated by this experience they began to investigate how
the aims sought could be attained. Thus they embarked upon attempts
to measure changes in purchasing power and to eliminate such
changes.
The problem assumed much greater importance when governments initiated their policies of long-term irredeemable and perpetual
loans. The state, this new deity of the dawning age of statolatrv, this
eternal and superhuman institution beyond the reach of earthly
frailties, offered to the citizen an opportunity to put his wealth in
safety and to enjoy a stable income secure against all vicissitudes. It
opened a way to free the individual from the necessity of risking and
acquiring his wealth and his income anew each day in the capitalist
market. He who invested his funds in bonds issued by the government
and its subdivisions was no longer subject to the inescapable laws
of the market and to the sovereignty of the consumers. H e was no
longer under the necessity of investing his funds in such a way that
they would best serve the wants and needs of the consumers. R e was
secure, he was safeguarded against the dangers of the competitive
market in which losses are the penalty of inefficiency; the eternal state
had taken him under its wing and guaranteed him the undisturbed
enjoyment of his funds. Henceforth his income no longer stemmed
from the process of supplying the wants of the consumers in the
best possible way. but from the taxes levied by the state's apparatus
of compulsion and coercion. H e was no longer a servant of his fellow
citizens, subject to their sovereignty; hc was a partner of the government which ruled the people and exacted tribute from them. What
the government paid as interest was Iess than the market offered. But
this difference was far outweighed by the unquestionable solvency of
the debtor, the state whose revenue did not depend on satisfying the
public, but on insisting on the payment of taxes.
In spite of the unpleasant experiences with public debts in earlier

The Sphere of Economic CalcuEation

227

days, people were ready to trust freely the modernized state of the
nineteenth century. I t was generally assumed that this new state
would scrupulously meet its voluntarily contracted obligations.
Capitalists and entrepreneurs were fully aware of the fact that in the
market society there is no means of preserving acquired wealth other
than by acquiring it anew each day in tough competition with everybody, with the already existing firms as we11 as with newcomers
"operating on a shoe string." The entrepreneur, grown old and
weary and no longer prepared to risk his hard-earned wealth by newattempts to meet the wants of consumers, and the heir of other people's
profits, lazy and fully conscious of his own inefficiency, preferred
investmeniin bonds of the public debt because they wanted to be
free from the law of the market.
Now, the irredeemable perpetual public debt presupposes the
srabilitv of purchasing power. Although the state and its compulsion
may bk eternal, the interest paid on the public debt could be eternal
only if based on a standard of unchanging value. In this form the
investor who for security's sake shuns the market, entrepreneurship,
and investment in free enterprise and prefers government bonds is
faced again with the problem of the changeability of all human affairs.
H e discovers that in the frame of a market society there is no room
left for wealth not dependent upon the market. His endeavors to
find an inexhaustible source of income fail.
There are in this world no such things as stability and security and
no human endeavors are powerful enough to bring them about. There
is in the social system of the market society no other means of ac@ring wealth and of preserving it than successful service to the
consumers. The state is, of course, in a position to exact payments
from its subjects and to borrow funds. However, even the most
ruthless government in the long run is not able to defy thc laws
determining human life and action. If the government uses the sums
borrowed for investment in those lines in which they best serve the
wants of the consumers, and if it succeeds in these entrepreneurial
activities in free and equal competition with all private entrepreneurs,
it is in the same position as any other businessman; it can pay interest
because it has made surpluses. But if the government invests funds
~insucccssfullyand no surplus results, or if it spends the monev for
current expenditure, the capital borrowed shrinks or disappeak entirely, and no source is opened from which interest and principal could
bc paid. Then taxing the people is the only method available for
complying with the articles of the credit contract. In asking taxes
for such payments the government makes the citizens answerable for

228

Human Action

money squandered in the past. T h e taxes paid are not compensated
by any present service rendered by the government's apparatus.
The government pays interest on capital which has been consumed
and n o longer exists. The treasury is burdened with the unfortunate
results of past policies.
A good case can be made out for short-term government debts
under special conditions. Of course, the popular justiiication of war
loans is nonsensical. All the materials needed for the conduct of a
war must be provided by restriction of civilian consumption, by
using up a part of the capital available and by working harder. T h e
whole burden of warring falls upon the living generation. T h e coming generations are only affected to the extent to which, on account
of the war expenditure, they will inherit less from those now living
than they would have jf no war had been fought. Financing a war
through'loans does not shift the burden to the sons and grandson^.^
It is merely a method of distributing the burden among the citizens.
If the whole expenditure had to be provided by taxes, only those
who have liquid funds could be approached. T h e rest of the people
would not contribute adequately. Short-term loans can be instrumental in removing such inequalities, as they allow for a fair assessment on the owners of fixed capital.
T h e long-term public and semipublic credit is a foreign and disturbing element in the structure of a market society. Its establishment was a futile attempt to go beyond the limits of human action
and to create an orbit of security and eternity removed from the
transitorincss and instability of earthly affairs. What an arrogant
presumption to borrow and to lend money for ever and ever, to make
contracts for eternity, to stipulate for all times to come! In this
respect it mattered little whether the loans were in a formal manner
made irredeemable or not; intentionally and practicalIy they were
as a rule considered and dealt with as such. In the heyday of liberalism
some Western nations really retired parts of their long-term debt by
honest reimbursement. But for the most part new debts were only
heaped upon old ones. T h e financial history of the last century shows
a steady increase in the amount of public indebtedness. Nobody believes that the states will eternally drag the burden of these inierest
payments. It is obvious that sooner or later all these debts will b e
liquidated in some way or other, but certainly not by payment of
interest and principal according to the terms of the contract. A host
7. I,oans, in this context, mean funds borrowed from those who have money
available for lending. W e do not refer here to credit expansion of which the main
vehicle in present-day America is borrowing from the commercial banks.

T h e Sphere of Economic Calcdation
of sophisticated writers are already busy elaborating the moral
palhation for the day of final settlement."
The fact that economic calculation in terms of money is unequal to
the tasks which are assigned to it in these illusory schemes for establishment of an unrealizable realm of calm removed from the inescapable limitations of human action and providing eternal security cannot be called a deficiency. There are no such things as eternal, absolute, and unchanging values. T h e search for a standard of such values
is vain, Economic calculation is not imperfect because it does not
correspond to the confused ideas of people yearning for a stable income not dependent on the productive processes of men.
8. The most popular of these doctrines is crystallized in the phrase: A public
debt is no burden because we owe it t o ourselves. If this were true, then the
wholesale obliteration of the public debt would be an innocuous operation, a
mere act of bookkeeping and accountancy. The fact is that the public debt
embodies claims of people who have in the past entrusted funds to the government against all those who are daily producing new wealth. I t burdens the producing strata for the benefit of another part of the people. It is possible to free
the producers of new wealth from this burden by collecting the taxes required
for the payments exclusively from the bondholders. But this means undisguised
repudiation.

XIII. MONETARY CALCULATION AS A TOOL
OF ACTION
I.

Monetary Calculation as a Method of Thinking

calculation is the guiding star of action under the
social system of division of labor. It is the compass of the man
M
embarking upon production. H e calculatcs in order to distinguish
ONETARY

the remunerative lines of production from the unprofitable ones,
those of which the sovereign consumers are likely to approve from
those of which they are likely to disapprove. Every single step of
entrepreneurial activities is subject to scrutiny by monetary calculation. The premeditation of planned action becomes commercial
precalculation of expected costs and expected proceeds. The retrospective establishment of the outcome of past action becomes accounting of profit and loss.
T h e system of economic calculation in monetary terms is conditioned by certain social institutions. It can operate only in an institutional setting of the division of labor and private ownership of the
means of production in which goods and services of all orders are
bought and sold against a generally used medium of exchange, i.e.,
money.
Monetary calculation is the method of calculating cmploycd by
people acting within the frame of society based on private control of
the means of production. It is a device of acting individuals; it is a
mode of computation designed for ascertaining private wealth and
income and private profits and losses of individuals acting on their
own behalf within a free enterprise society.=All its results refer to the
actions of individuals only. When statisticians summarize these results,
the outcome shows the sum of the autonomous actions of a plurality
of self-directing individuals, but not the effect of the action of a
collective body, of a whole, or of a totality. Monetary calculation is
entirely inapplicable and useless for any consideration which does not
look at things from the point of view of individuals. It involves cald a t i n g the individuals' profits, not imaginary "social" values and
"social" welfare.
I. In partnerships and corporations it is always individuals who act, although
not only one individual.

Monetary Calculation as a Tool of Action

231

Monetary calculation is the main vehicle of planning and acting
in the social setting of a society of free enterprise directed and controlled by the market and its prices. It developed in this frame and was
gradually perfected with the improvement of the market mechanism
and with the cxpansiori of the scope of things which are negotiated
on markets against money. It was economic calculation that assigned
to measurement, number, and reckoning the role thcy play in our
quantitative and computing civiIization. The measurements of physics
and chcrnistry make sense for practical action only because there is
economic calculation. It is monetary calculation that made arithmetic
a tool in the struggle for a better life. It provides a mode of using
the achievements of laboratory cxperiments for the most efficacious
removal of uneasiness.
Monetary calculation reaches its fulI pcrfection in capital accounting. It establishes the money prices of the available means and confronts this total with the changes brought about by action and by
the operation of other factors. This confrontation shows what changes
occurred in the state of the acting men's affairs, and the magnitude of
those changes; it makes success and failure, profit and loss ascertainable. T h e system of free cnterprise has been dubbed capitalism in
order to deprccate and to smcar it. However, this term can be considered very pertinent. I t refers to the most characteristic feature of
the system, its main eminence, viz. the role the notion of capital plays
in its conduct.
There are people to whom monetary calculation is repulsive. They
do not want to be rouscd from their daydrcams by the voice of critical
reason. Reality sickens thcm, they long for a realm of unlimited opportunity. They are disgusted by the meanness of a social order in
which everything is nicely reckoned in dollars and pennies. They
call their grumbling the noble deportment worthy of the friends of
the spirit, of beauty, and virtue as opposed to the ignoble baseness
and villainy of Babbittry. However, the cult of beauty and virtue,
wisdom and the search for truth are not hindered by the rationality
of the calculating and computing mind. It is only romantic reverie
that cannot thrive in a milieu of sober criticism. The cool-headed
reckoner is the stern chastiser of the ecstatic visionary.
Our civilization is inseparably linked with our methods of economic calculation. It would perish if we were to abandon this most
precious intellectual tool of acting. Goethe was right in calling bookkeeping by doublc entry "one of the finest inventions of the human
mind." "
z. Cf.Goethe, Wilhelvz Meister's Apprenticeship, Bk. I , chap. x.

Human Action
2. Economic

Calculation and the Science of
Human Action

T h e evolution of capitalist economic calculation was the necessary condition for the establishment of a systematic and logically
coherent science of human action. Praxeology and economics have
a definite place in the evolution of human history and in the process
of scientific research. They could only emerge when acting man
had succeeded in creating methods of thinking that rnade it possible
to calculate his actions. T h e science of human action was at the
beginning merely a discipline dealing with those actions which can
be tested by monetary calculation. It dealt exclusively with what we
may call the orbit of economics in the narrower sense, that is, with
those actions which within a market society are transacted by the
intermediary of money. The first steps on the way to its elaboration
were odd investigations concerning currency, moneylending, and the
~ r i c e sof various goods. The knowledge conveyed by Gresham's Law,
the first crude formulations of the quantity theory of money-such
as those of Bodin and Davanzati-and the Law of Gregory King
mark the first dawn of the cognition that regularity of phenomena
and inevitable necessity prevail in the field of action. The first comprehensive system of economic theory, that brilliant achievement of
the classical economists, was essentially a theory of cakulated action.
It drew implicitly the borderline between what is to be considered
economic and what extra-economic along the line which separates
action calculated in monetary terms from other action. Starting
from this basis the economists were bound to widen step by step the
field of their studies until they finally developed a system dealing
with a11 human choices, a general theory of action.

Part Four

Catullactics or Economics of the Market Society

XIV. THE SCOPE AND METHOD OF CATALLAC'TICS

.

r T h e Delimitation of Catallactic Problems

have never been any doubts and uncertainties about the
scope of economic science. Ever since people have been eager
for a systematic study of economics or political economy, all have
agreed that it is the task of this branch of knowledge to investigate
the market phenomena, that is, the determination of the mutual exchange ratios of the goods and services negotiated on markets, their
origin in human action and their effects upon later action. The intricacy of a precise definition of the scope of economics does not
stem from uncertainty with regard to the orbit of the phenomena
to be investigated. I t is due to the fact that the attempts to elucidate
the phenomena concerned must go beyond the range of the market
and of market transactions. In order to conceive the market fully
one is forced to study the action of hypothetical isolated individuals
on one hand and to-contrast the ma& system with an imaginary
socialist commonwealth on the other hand. In studying interpersonal
exchange one cannot avoid dealing with autistic exchange. But then
it is no longer possible to define neatly the boundaries between the
kind of action which is the proper field of economic science in
the narrower sense, and other action. Economics widens its horizon
and turns into a general science of all and every human action, into
praxeology. The question emerges of how to distinguish precisely,
within the broader field of general praxeoIogy, a narrower orbit of
specifically economic problems.
T h e abortive attempts to solve this problem of a precise delimitation of the scope of catallactics have chosen as a criterion either the
motives causing action or the goals which action aims at. But the
variety and manifoldness of the motives instigating a man's action is
without relevance for a comprehensive study of acting. Every action
is motivated by the urge to remove a felt uneasiness. I t does not matter for the science of action how people qualify this uneasiness from
a physiological, psychological, or ethical point of view. It is the task
of economics to deal with all commodity prices as they are really
asked and paid in market transactions. It must not restrict its investi-

T

MERE

234
Human Action
gations to the study of those prices which result or are likely to
rcsult from a conduct displaying attitudes to which psychology,
ethics, or any other way of looking at human behavior would attach
a definite label. The classification of actions according to their various
motives may be momentous for psychology and may provide a yardstick for a moral evaluation; for economics it is inconsequential. Essentially the same is valid with regard to the endeavors to restrict the
scope of economics to those actions which aim at supplying people
with tangible material things of the external universe. Strictly speaking, people do not Iong for tangible goods as such, but for the services which these goods are fitted to render them. T h e y want to attain
the increment in well-being which these services are able to convey.
Rut if this is so, it is not permissible to except from the orbit of "economic" action those actions which removc uneasiness directly without the interposition of any tangible and visible things. The advice of
a doctor, the instruction of a teacher, the recital of an artist, and other
personal services are no less an object of economic studies than the
architect's plans for the construction of a building, the scientist's
formula for the production of a chemical con~pound,and the author's
contribution to the publishing of a book.
T h e subject matter of catallactics is all market phenomena with all
their roots, ramifications, and consequences. It is a fact that people in
dealing on the market are motivated not only by the desire to get
food, shelter, and sexual enjoyment, but also by manifold "ideal"
urges. Acting man is always concerned both with "material" and
"ideal" things. H e chooses between various alternatives, no matter
whether they are to be classified as material or ideal. In the actual scales
of value material and ideal things are jumbled together. Even if it
were feasible to draw a sharp line between material and ideal concerns, one must realize that every concrete action either aims at the
realization both of material and ideal ends or is thc outcome of a
choice between something material and something ideal.
Whether it is possible to separate neatly those actions which aim
at the satisfaction of needs exclusively conditioned by man's physiological constitution from othcr "higher" needs can be left undecided.
But we must not overlook the fact that in reality no food is valued
solely for its nutritive power and no garment or house solely for the
protection it affords against cold weather and rain. It cannot be denied
that the demand for goods is widely influenced b y metaphysical,
religious, and ethical considerations, by aesthetic value judgments, by
customs, habits, prejudices, tradition, changing fashions, and many
other things. To an cconomist who would try to restrict his investi-

T h e Scope and Method of Catallactics

235

gations to "material" aspects only, the subject matter of inquiry
vanishes as soon he wants to catch it.
All that can be contended is this: Econon~icsis mainly concerned
with the analysis of the determination of money prices of goods and
services exchanged on the market. In order t o accomplish this task
i t must start from a comprehensive theory of human action. Moreover, i t must study not only the market phenomena, but no less the
hypothetical conduct of an isolated man and of a socialist community.
Finally, it must not restrict its investigations to those modes of action
which in mundane speech are called "economic" actions, but must
deal also with actions which are in a loose manncr of speech called
'L~ne~on~nli~."
T h e scope of praxeology, the genera1 theory of human action, can
be precisely defined and circumscribed. T h e specifically economic
problems, the problems of economic action in the narrower sense,
can only b y and large be disengaged from the comprehensive body
of praxeological theory. Accidental facts of the history of science and
conventions play a role in all attempts to provide a definition of the
scope of "genuine" economics.
N o t logical or epistemological rigor, but considerations of expediency and traditional convention make us declare that the field of
cataIlactics or of economics in the narrower sense is the analysis of
the market phenomena. This is tantamount to the statement: Catallactics is the analysis of those actions which are conductcd on the
basis of monetary calculation. Market exchange and monetary calculation are inseparably linked together. A market in which there
is direct exchange only is merely an imaginary construction. O n the
other hand, money and monetary calculation are conditioned by the
existence of the market.
It is certainly one of the tasks of economics to analyze the working of an imaginary socialist systcm of production. Rut access to this
study too is possible only through the study of catallactics, the elucidation of a systcm in which there are money prices and economic calculation.

T h e Denial of Econonzics
There are doctrines flatly denying that there can be a science of economics. What is taught nowadays a t most of the universities under the
label of economics is practically a denial of it.
He who contests the existence of economics virtually denies that man's
well-being is disturbed by any scarcity of external factors. Everybody,
he implies, could enjoy the perfect satisfaction of all his wishes, provided
a reform succeeds in overcoming certain obstacles brought about by inap-

236

Human Action

propriate man-made institutions. h'ature is open-handed, it lavishly loads
mankind with presents. Conditions could be paradisiac for an indefinite
number of people. Scarcity is an artificial product of established practices.
The abolition of such practices would result in abundance.
In the doctrine of Karl Marx and his followers scarcity is a historical
category only. It is the feature of the primeval history of mankind which
will be forever liquidated by the abolition of private property. Once mankind has effected the leap from the realni of necessity into the realm of
freedom and thereby reached "the higher phase of comniunist society"
there will be abundance and consequently i t will he feasible to give "to
each according to his needs." There is in the vast flood of Marxian writings not the slightest allusion to the possibility that a communist society in
its "higher phase" might have to face a scarcity of natural factors of production. The fact of the disutility of labor is spirited away by the assertion
that to work, under communism of course, will no longer be pain but
pleasure, "the primary necessity of life." T h e unpleasant experiences of
the Russian "experiment" are interpreted as caused by the capitalists'
hostility, by the fact that socialism in one country only is not yet perfect
and therefore has not yet been able to bring about the "higher phase," and,
more recently, by the war.
Then there are the radical inflationists as represented, for example, by
Proudhon, Ernest Solvay, and, in present-day America, by the doctrine of
"functional finance." In their opinion scarcity is created by the artificial
checks upon credit expansion and other methods of increasing the quantity
of money in circulation, enjoined upon the gullible public by the selfish
class interests of bankers and other exploiters. They recommend unlimited
public spending as the panacea.
The foremost American champion of the substjtution of an economy of
abundance for the aIIegedly artificial economy of scarcity is the former
Vice-president of the United States, Henry A. Wallace. 1Mr. Wallace will
be remembered in history as the originator of the vastest scheme ever
carried out to restrict by government decree the supply of essential foodstuffs and raw materials. However, this record in no way impairs the popularity of his teachings.
Such is the myth of potential plenty and abundance. Economics may
leave i t to the historians and psychologists to explain the popularity of this
kind of wishful thinking and indulgence in daydreams. All that economics
has to say about such idle talk is that economics deals with the problems
man has to face on account of the fact that his life is conditioned by natural
factors. It deals with action, i.e., with the conscious endeavors to remove
as far as possible felt uneasiness. It has nothing to assert with regard to the
I . Cf. Engels, Herrn Eugen Duhrtngs Umwalzung der Wissenschaft (7th ed.
Stuttgart, I ~ I O ) ,p. 306.
2. Cf. Karl Marx, Zur Kritik des sozialdenzokratiscben Parteiprogra?nms con
Gotha, ed. Kreibich (Rekhanberg, ~ g z o ) ,p. 17.
3. Cf. ibid.

T h e Scope and Method of Catallactics

237

state of affairs in an unrealizable and for human reason even inconceivable
universe of unlimited opportunities. In such a world, it may be admitted,
there will be no law of value, no scarcity, and no economic problems.
These things will be absent because there will be no choices t o be made,
no action, and no tasks to be solved by reason. Beings which would have
thrived in such a world would never have developed reasoning and thinking. If ever such a world were to be given to the descendants of the human
race, these blessed beings would see their power to think wither away and
would cease to be human. For the primary task of reason is to cope consciously with the limitations imposed upon man by nature, to fight against
scarcity. Acting and thinking man is the product of a universe of scarcity
in which whatever well-being can be attained is the prize of toil and
trouble, of conduct popularly called economic.
2.

The Method of Imaginary Constructions

T h e specific method of economics is the method of imaginary constructions.
This method is the method of praxeology. That it has been carefully elaborated and perfectcd in the field of economic studies in the
narrower sense is due to the fact that economics, at least until now,
has been the best-developed part of praxcology. Everyone who wants
to express an opinion about the problems commonly called economic
takes recourse to this method. T h e employment of these imaginary
constructions is, to be sure, not a procedure peculiar to the scientific
analysis of these problems. T h e layman in dealing with them resorts
t o the same method. But while the layman's constructions are more
o r less confused and muddled, economics is intent upon elaborating
them with the utmost care, scrupulousness, and precision, and upon
examining their conditions and assumptions critically.
An imaginary construction is a conceptual image of a sequence of
cvents logically evolved from the elements of action employed in its
formation. It is a product of deduction, ultimately derived from the
fundamental category of action, the act of preferring and setting
aside. In designing such an imaginary construction the economist is
not concerned with the question of whether or not it depicts the
conditions of reality which he wants to analyze. N o r does he bother
about the question of whether or not such a system as his imaginary
construction posits could be conceived as really existent and in operation. Even imaginary constructions which are inconceivable, selfcontradictory, or unrealizable can render useful, even indispensable
services in the comprehension of reality, provided the economist
knows how to use them properly.

238
Human Action
T h e method of imaginary constructions is justificd by its success.
Praxeology cannot, likc the natural sciences, base its teachings upon
laboratory experiments and sensory perception of cxternal objects.
It had to develop methods entirely different from those of physics
and biology. It would be a serious blunder to look for analogies to the
imaginary constructions in the field of the natural sciences. The
imaginary constructions of praxeology can never be confronted with
any expcrience of things external and can never be appraised from
the point of view of such experience. Their function is to serve man
in a scrutiny which cannot rely upon his senses. In confronting the
imaginary constructions with reality we cannot raise the question of
whether they correspond to cxperiencc and depict adequatcly the
empirical data. W e must ask whether the assumptions of our construction are identical u i t h the conditions of those actions which we
want to conceivc.
The main formula for designing of imaginary constructions is to
abstract from the operation of some conditions present in actual
action. Then we are in a position to grasp the hypothetical consequences of the absence of these conditions and to conceive the effects
of their existence. Thus wc conceive the category of action by constructing the image of a state in which there is no action, cither because the individual is fully contented and does not feel any uneasiness
or because he does not know any procedure from which an improvement in his well-being (state of satisfaction) could be expected. Thus
we conceive the notion of originary interest from an imaginary construction in which no distinction is made betwccn satisfactions in
periods of time equal in length but unequal with regard to their distance from the instant of action.
The rncthod of imaginary constructions is indispensable for praxeology; it is the only method of praxcological and economic inquiry.
It is, to be sure, a method very difficult to handle because it can easily
result in fallacious syllogisms. I t leads along a sharp edge; on both sides
yawns the chasm of absurdity and nonsense. Only merciless selfcriticism can prevent a man from falling headlong into these abysmal
depths.

3. T h e Pure Market Economy
The imaginary construction of a pure or unhampered marker
economy assumes that there is division of labor and private ownership (control) of the means of production and that consequently
there is market exchange of goods and services. I t assumes that the

The Scope and Method of Catallactics

2 39

operation of the market is not obstructed by institutional factors. I t
assumes that the government, the social apparatus of compulsion and
coercion, is intent upon preserving the operation of thc market system,
abstains from hindering its functioning, and protects it against encroachments on the part of other people. The market is free; there
is no interference of factors, foreign to the market, with prices, wage
rates, and interest rates. Starting from thcse assumptions economics
tries to elucidate the operation of a pure market economy. Only at
a later stage, having exhausted everything which can be learned from
the study of this imaginary construction, does it turn to the study of
the various problems raised by interference with the markct on the
part of governments and other agencies employing coercion and cornpulsion.
It is amazing that this logically incontestable procedure, the only
one that is fitted to solve the problems involved, has been passionately
attacked. Yeoplc have branded it as a prepossession in favor of a
liberal economic policy, which they stigmatke as reactionary, economic royalism, &lanchcsterism, negativism, and so on. T h e y deny
that anything can be gained for the Imovdedge of reaXty from occupation with this imaginary construction. However, these turbulent
critics contradict thernsclves as they take recourse to the same method
in advancing their own assertions. In asking for minimum wage rates
thev depict the alleged unsatisfactory conditions of a free labor markctand in asking for tariffs they describe the alleged disasters brought
about by free trade. There is, of course, no other way available for
the elucidation of a measure limiting the free play of the factors
operating on an unhampered market than to study first the state of
affairs prevailing under cconomic freedom.
It is true that economists have drawn from their investigations the
conclusion that the goals which most people, practically even all
people, are intent on attaining b y toiling and working and b y economic policy, can best be realized where the free market system is
not impcded h y govcrnment decrees. But this is not a preconceived
judgment stemming from an insufficient occupation with the operation of government interference with business. It is, on the contrary,
the result of a careful, unbiased scrutiny of all aspccts of interventionism.
It is also true that the classical economists and their epigones used
to call the system of unhampered market economy "naturaIn and
government meddling with market phenomena "artificial" and "disturbing." Rut this terminology also was the product of their careful
scrutiny of the problems of interventionism. T h e y were in con-

240

Human Action

formity with the semantic practice of their age in calling an undesirable state of social affairs "contrary to nature."
Theism and Deism of the Age of Enlightenment viewed the regularity of natural phenomena as an emanation of the decrees of Providence. When the philosophers of the Enlightenment discovered that
there prevails a regularity of phenomena also in human action and in
social evolution, they were prepared to interpret it likewise as evidence of the patcrnal care of the Creator of the universe. This was
the true meaning of the doctrine of the predetermined harmony as
expounded by some economist^.^ T h e social philosophy of patkrnal
despotism laid stress upon the divine mission of kings and autocrats
predestined to rule the peoples. T h e liberals retorted that the operation
of an unhampered market, on which the consumer-it., every citizen
-is sovereign, brings about more satisfactory results than the decrees
of anointed rulers. Observe the functioning of the market system,
they said, and you will discover in it the finger of God.
Along with the imaginary construction of a pure market economy
the classical economists elaborated its logical counterpart, the imaginary construction of a socialist commonwealth. In the heuristic
process which finally led to the discovery of the operation of a
market economy this image of a socialist order even had logical
priority. T h e question which preoccupied the economists was whether
a tailor could be supplied with bread and shoes if there was no government decree compelling the baker and the shoemaker to provide
for his needs. T h e first thought was that authoritarian interference is
required to make every specialist serve his fellow citizens. T h e
economists were taken aback when they discovered that no such
compulsion is needed. In contrasting productivity and profitability,
self-interest and public welfare, selfishness and altruism, the economists implicitly referred to the image of a socialist system. Their
astonishment at the "automatic," as it were, steering of the market
system was preciseIy due to the fact that they realized that an "anarchic" state of production results in supplying people better than
the orders of a centralized omnipotent government. The idea of
socialism-a system of the division of labor entirely controlled and
managed by a planning authority-did not originate in the heads of
utopian reformers. These utopians aimed rather at the autarkic coexistence of small self-sufficient bodies; take, for instance, Fourier's
phalange. T h e radicalism of the reformers turned toward socialism
4. T h e doctrine of the predetermined harmony in the operation of an unhampered market system must not be confused with the theorem of the harmony
of the rightly understood interests within a market system, although there is a
certain congeniality between them. Cf. below, pp. 669-678.

The Scope and Method of Catallactics
when thcy took the image of an economy managed by a national
government or a world authority, implied in rhe theories of the economists, as a model for their n e w order.

The M~ximizatio?~
of Profits
It is generally believed that economists, in dealing with the problems of
a tnarket economy, are quite unrealistic in assuming that all men are always
eager to gain the highest attainable advantage. They construct, it is said,
the image of a perfectly selfish and rationalistic being for whom nothing
counts but ~ r o f i t .Such a homo oeconomicus may be a likeness of stock
jobbers and speculators. But the immense majority are very different.
Nothing for the cognition of reality can be learned from the study of the
conduct of this delusive image.
It is not necessary to enter again into a refutation of all the confusion,
error, and distortion inherent in this contention. T h e first two parts of this
book have unmasked the fallacies implied. At this point it is enough to
deal with the problem of the maximization of profits.
Praxeology in general and economics in its special field assume with
regard to the springs of human action nothing other than that acting man
wants to remove uneasiness. Under the particular conditions of dealing on
the market, action means buying and selling. Everything that economics
asserts about demand and supply refers to every instance of demand and
supply and not only to demand and supply brought about by some special
circumstances requiring a particular description or definition. T o assert
that a man, faced with the alternative of getting more or Iess for a commodity he wants to sell, ceteris paribus chooses the high price, does not
require any further assunlption. A higher price means for the seller a better
satisfaction of his wants. T h e same applies mutatis mutandis to the buyer.
T h e amount saved in buying the commodity concerned enables him to
spend more for the satisfaction of other needs. T o buy in the cheapest
market and to sell in the dearest market is, other things being equal, not
conduct which would presuppose any special assumptions concerning the
actor's motives and morality. It is merely the necessary offshoot of any
action under the conditions of market exchange.
In his capacity as a businessman a man is a servant of the consumers,
bound to conlply with their wishes. H e cannot indulge in his own whims
and fancies. But his customers' whims and fancies are for him ultimate law,
provided these customers are ready to pay for them. H e is under the necessity of adjusting his conduct to the demand of the consumers. If the consumers, without a taste for the beautiful, prefer things ugly and vulgar, he
must, contrary to his own convictions, supply them with such things.5 If
consumers do not want to pay a higher price for domestic products than
5. A painter is a businessman if he is intent upon making paintings which could
be sold a t the highest price. A painter who does not compromise with the taste
of the buving public and, disdaining d l unpleasant consequences, lets himself b e
guided solely by his own ideals is an artist, a creative genius. Cf. above, pp. I 38-1 40.

242

Human Action

for those produced abroad, he must buy the foreign product, provided it
is cheaper. An employer cannot grant favors at the expense of his customers. H e cannot pay wage rates higher than those determined by the
market if the buyers are not ready to pay proportionately higher prices
for comnlodities produced in plants in which wage rates are higher than
in other plants.
It is different with man in his capacity as spender of his income. H e is
free to do what he likes best. H e can bestow alms. H e can, motivated by
various doctrines and prcjudices, discriminate against goods of a certain
origin or source and prefer the worse or more expensive product to the
-technoIogically-better
and cheaper one. As a rule pcople in buying do
not make gifts to the seller. But nonetheless that happens. The boundaries
between buying goods and services needed and giving alms are sometimes
difficult to discern. H e who buys at a charity sale usually combines a purchase with a donation for a charitable purpose. H e who gives a dime to a
blind street musician certainly does not pay for the questionable performance; he simply gives alms.
lMan in acting is a unity. T h e businessman who owns the whole firm
may sometimes efface the boundaries between business and charity. If he
wants to relieve a distressed friend, delicacy of feeling may prompt him
to resort to a procedure which spares the latter the embarrassment of living
on alms. I-Te gives the friend a job in his office although he does not need
his help or could hire an equivalent helper at a lower salary. Then thc
salary granted appears formally as a part of business outlays. In fact it is
the spending of a fraction of the businessman's income. It is, from a correct
point of view, consumption and not an expenditure designed to increase
the firm's p r ~ f i t s . ~
Awkward mistakes are due to the tendency to look only upon things
tangible, visible, and rncasurable. and to neglect everything else. What the
consumer buys is not simply food or calories. H e does not want to feed like
a wolf, he wants to eat like a man. Food satisfies the appetite of many
people the better, the morc appetizingly and tastefully it is prepared, the
finer the table is set, and the more agreeable the environment is in which
the food is consumed. Such things are regarded as of no consequence by
a consideration exclusirdy occupied with the chernjcal aspects of rhe
process of digestion.7 But the fact that they play an important role in the
determination of food prices is perfectly compatible with the assertion
that people prefer. ceteris paribus, to buy in the cheapest market. Whenever a buyer. in choosing between two things which chemists and tech6. Such overlapping of the boundaries between business outlays and consumptive spending is vfren encouraged by jnstitutional conditions. An expenditure
debited to the account of trading expenses reduces net profits and thereby the
amount of taxes due. If taxes absorb 50 per cent of profits, the charitable businessman spends only 50 per cent of the gift out of his own pocket. The rest burdens
the Department of Internal Revenue.
7. T o be sure, a consideration from the point of view of the physiology of
nutrition will not regard such things as negligible.

T h e Scope and Method of Catallactics
nologists deem perfectly equal, prefers the more expensive, he has a reason.
If he does not err, he pays for services which chemistry and technology
cannot comprehend with their specific methods of investigation. If a man
prefers an expensive place to a cheaper one because he likes to sip his cocktails in the neighborhood of a duke or of cafC society, we may remark on
his ridiculous vanity. But we must not say that the man's conduct does not
aim at an improvenlent of his own state of satisfaction.
What a man does is always aimed at an improvement of his own state
of satisfaction. In this scnse-and in no other-we are free to use the term
selfishness and to emphasize that action is necessarily always selfish. Even
an action directly aiming at the improvement of other people's conditions
is selfish. T h e actor considers it as more satisfactory for himself to make
other people eat than to eat himself. His uneasiness is caused by the awareness of the fact that other people are in want.
It is a fact that many people behave in another way and prefer to fill
their own stomach and not that of their fellow citizens. But this has nothing to do with economics; it is a datum of historical experience. At any
rate, economics refers t o every kind of action, no matter whether motivated by the urge of a man to eat or to make other people eat.
If maximizing profits means that a man in all market transactions aims at
increasing to the utmost the advantage derived, it is a pleonastic and periphrastic circumlocution. It only asserts what is implied in the very category
of action. If it means anything else, it is the expression of an erroneous idea.
Some economists believe that i t is the task of economics to establish how
in the whole of society the greatest possible satisfaction of all people or of
the greatest number could be attained. They do not realize that there is
no method which would allow us to measure the state of satisfaction attained by various individuals. They n~isconstructhe character of judgments which arc based on the comparison between various people's happiness. While expressing arbitrary value judgments, they believe themselves
to be establishing facts. One may caIl it: just to rob thc rich in order to
make presents to the poor. However, to call something fair or unfair is
always a subjective value judgment and as such purely personal and not
liable to any verification or falsification. Economics is not intent upon
pronouncing value judgments. It aims at a cognition of the consequences
of certain modes of acting.
I t has been asserted that the physiological needs of all men arc of the
same kind and that this equality provides a standard for the measurement
of the degree of their objective satisfaction. In expressing such opinions
and in recommending the use of such criteria to guide the government's
policy, one proposes to deal with men as the breeder deals with his cattle.
But the reformers fail to reaIize that there is no universal principle of alimentation valid for all men. Which one of the various principles one
chooses depends entirely on the aims one wants to attain. The cattle
breeder does not feed his cows in order to make them happy, but in order
to attain the ends which he has assigned to them in his own plans. He may

244

Humm Action

prefer more milk or more meat or something else. What type of man do
the man breeders want to rear-athletes or mathematicians? U7arriors or
factory hands? He who would make man the material of a purposeful
system of breeding and feeding would arrogate to himself despotic
powers and would use his felIow citizens as means for the attainment of
his own ends, which differ from those they themselves are aiming at.
The value judgments of an individual differentiatc between what makes
him more satisfied and what less. The valuc judgments a man pronounces
about: another man's satisfaction do not assert anything about this other
man's satisfaction. They only assert what condition of this other man
better satisfies the man who pronounces the judgment. The reformers
searching for the maximum of general satisfaction have told us merely
what state of other people's affairs would best suit themselves.

q. The Autistic Economy
N o other imaginary construction has caused more offense than that
of a n isolated economic actor entirely dependent on himsclf. However, economics cannot do without it. In order to study interpersonal
exchange it must compare it with conditions under which it is absent.
It constructs two varieties of the image of an autistic economy in
which there is only autistic exchange: the cconomy of an isolated
individual and the economy of a socialist society. In cmploying this
imaginary construction the economists do not bother about the problem of 6.hether or not such a system could really
T h e y are
fully aware of the fact that their imaginary construction is fictitious.
Robinson Crusoe, who, for all that, may have existed, and thc general
manager of a perfectly isolated socialist commonwealth that never
existed, would not have been in a position to plan and to act as people
can only whcn taking recourse to economic calculation. However,
in the frame of our imaginary construction w c are free to pretend
that they could calculate whenever such a fiction may be useful for
the discussion of the specific problem to be dealt with.
T h e imaginary construction of an autistic economy is at the bottom
of the popular distinction between productivity and profitability as it
developed as a yardstick of value judgments. Those resorting to this
distinction consider the autistic economy, especially that of the
socialist type, the most desirable and most perfect system of economic management. Every phenomenon of the market economy is
judged with regard to whether or not it could be justified from the
8. We are dealing here with problems of theory, not of history. We can therefore abstain from refuting the objections raised against the concept of an isolated
actor by referring to the historical role of the self-sufficient household economy.

The Scope and Method of Catallactics

245

viewpoint of a socialist system. Only to acting that would be purposeful in the plans of such a system's manager are positive value and
the epithet prodz~ctiveattached. All other activities performed in the
market economy are called unproductive in spite of the fact that they
may be profitable to those who perform them. Thus, for example,
sales promotion, advertising, and banking are considered as activities
profitable but nonproductive.
Economics, of course, has nothing to say about such arbitrary value
judgments.

5 . The State of Rest and the Evenly Rotating
The only method of dealing with the problem of action is to
conceive that action ultimately aims at bringing about a state of
affairs in which there is no longer any action, whether because all
uneasiness has been removed or because any further removal of feIt
uneasiness is out of the question. Action thus tends toward a state
of rest, absencc of action.
The thcory of prices accordingly analyzes interpersona1 exchange
from this aspect. People keep on exchanging on the market until no
further exchange is ~ossiblebecause no party expects any further improvement of its own conditions from a new act of exchange. The
potential buyers consider the prices asked by the potential sellers
unsatisfactory, and vice versa. No more transactions take place. A
state of rest emerges. This state of rest, which we may call the plain
state of rest, is not merely an imaginary construction. It comes to
pass again and again. When the stock market closes, the brokers have
carried out a11 orders which could be executed at the market price.
Only those potential sellers and buycrs who consider the market
price too low or too high respectively have not sold or b o ~ g h t . ~
The
same is vaIid with regard to all transactions. The whole market economy is a big exchange or markct place, as it werc. At any instant
all those transactions take place which the parties are ready to enter
into at the realizable price. New sales can only be effected whcn the
vahations of thc parties have changed.
It has been asserted that the notion of the plain state of rest is
unsatisfactory. It refers, people have, said, only to the determination
of prices of goods of which a definite supply is already available, and
does not say anything about the effects brought about by these prices
9. For the sake of simplicity we disregard the price fluctuations in thc course
of the business day.

Human Action
upon production. T h e objection is unfounded. T h e theorems implied in the notion of the plain state of rest are valid with regard to
all transactions without exception. I t is true, the buyers of factors
of production will immediately embark upon producing and very
soon reenter the market in order to sell their products and to buy
what they want for their own consumption and for continuing
production processes. I3ut this does not invalidate the scheme. This
scheme, to be sure, does not contend that the state of rest will last.
'The lull will certainly disappear as soon as the momentary conditions which brought it about change.
T h e notion of the plain state of rcst is not an imaginary construction but the adequate description of what happens again and again
on evcry marltet. In this regard it differs radically from the imaginary
construction of the final state of rest.
In dealing with the plain state of rest ure look only a t what is
going on right nonr. W e restrict our attention to what has happened
momentarily and disregard what will happen later, in the next instant or tomorrow o r later. W e are dealing only with prices really
paid in sales, i.e., with the prices of the immediate past. W e do not
ask whether or not future prices will equal these prices.
Bat now wc go a step further. W e pay attention to factors which
are bound to bring ahout a tendency toward price changes. W e try
to find out to what g o d this tendency rnust lead before all its driving
force is exhausted and a new state of rest'emergcs. The price corresponding to this future statc of rest was called the natural price b y
older economists; nowadays the term static price is often used. In order
to avoid misleading associations it is more expedient to call it the
final price and accordingly to speak of the \ha1 state of rest. This
final state of rest is an imaginary construction, not a description of
reality. For the final state of rcst will never be attained. N e w disturbing factors will emerge before it will be realized. W h a t makes
it necessary to take recourse to this imaginary construction is the
fact that the marlret at every instant is moving toward a final state
of rest. Every later new instant can create new facts altering this
final state of iest. But the market is always disquieted b y a striving
after a definite final statc of rest.
T h e market price is a real phenomenon; it is the exchange ratio
which was actual in business transactecf. T h e final price is a hypothetical price. T h e market prices are historical facts and we are therefore i n a position to note them with numcricaI exactitude in dollars
and cents. T h e final price can only be defined b y defining the conditions required for its emergence. N o definite numerical value in

The Scope and A4ethod of Catallactics

247

monetary terms or in quantities of other goods can be attributed to
it. It wiil nevcr appear on the market. The market price can never
coincide with the final price coordinated to the instant in which this
market structure is actual. But catallactics would faiI lamentably in
its task of analyzing the problems of price determination if it were to
neglect dealing with the final price. For in the market situation from
which the market price emerges there are already latent forces operating which will go on bringing about price changes until, provided
no new data appear, the final price and the final state of rest are
established. W e wouId unduly restrict our study of price determination if we were to loolr only upon the momentary market prices and
the plain state of rest and to disregard the fact that the market is
already agitated by factors which must result in further price changes
and a tendency toward a different state of rest.
The phenomenon with which we have to cope is the fact that
changes in the factors which determine the formation of prices do
not produce a11 their effects at once. A span of time must elapse before all their effects are exhausted. Between the appearance of a new
datum and the perfect adjustment of the market to it some time must
pass. (And, of course, while this period of time elapses, other new
data appear.) In dealing with the effects of any change in the factors
operating on the market, we must never forget that we are dealing
with events taking place in succession, with a series of effects succeeding one another. W e are not in a position to know in advance
how much time will have to elapse. But we know for certain that some
time must elapse, although this period may sometimes be so smaIl that
it hardly plays any role in practical life.
Economists often erred in neglecting the element of time. Take
for instance the controvcrsy concerning the effects of changes in the
quantity of money. Some people were only concerned with its longrun effects, i.e., with the final prices and the final state of rest. Others
saw only the short-run effects, i.c., the prices of the instant following the change in the data. Both were mistaken and their conclusions
were consequently vitiated. Many more cxamples of the same blunder
could be cited.
The imaginary construction of the final state of rest is marked by
paying full regard to change in the temporal succession of events. In
this respect it diffcrs from the imaginary construction of the evenly
rotating economy which is characterized by the elimination of change
in the data and of the time element. (It is inexpedient and misleading
to call this imaginary construction, as is usual, the static economy or
the static equilibrium, and it is a bad mistake to confuse it with the

248
Human Action
imaginary construction of a stationary economy.lO) The evenly
rotating economy is a fictitious system in which thc market prices
of all goods and services coincide with the final prices. There are
in its frame no price changes whatever; there is perfect price stability. The same market transactions are repeated again and again. The
goods of thc higher orders pass in the same quantities through the
same stages of processing until ultimatcly the produced consumers'
goods come into the hands of the consumers and are consumed. N o
changes in the market data occur. Today does not differ from yesterday and tomorrow will not differ from today. T h e system is in
perpetual flux, but it remains always at the same spot. It revolves
evenly round a fixed center, it rotates evenly. The plain state of rest
is disarranged again and again, but it is instantly reestablished at the
previous level. All factors, including thosc bringing about the recurring disarrangement of the plain state of rest, arc comtant. Therefore prices--commonly called static or equilibrium prices-remain
constant too.
T h e essence of this imaginary construction is the elimination of
the lapse of time and of the perpetual change in the market phenomena.
The notion of any change with regard to supply and demand is incompatible with this construction. Only such changes as do not
affect the configuration of the price-determining factors can be
considered in its frame. It is not necessary to people the imaginary
world of the evenly rotating economy with immortal, non-aging and
nonproliferating men. We are free to assume that infants are born,
grow old, and finally die, provided that total population figures and
the number of people in every age group remain equal. Then the
demand for commodities whose consumption is limited to certain
age groups does not alter, although the individuals from whom it
originates are not the same.
In reality there is never such a thing as an evenly rotating economic system. However, in order to analyze the prol.&rns of change
in the data and of unevenly and irregularly varying movement, wc
must confront them with a fictitious state in which both are hypothetically eliminated. It is therefore preposterous to maintain that the
construction of an evenly rotating economy does not elucidate conditions within a changing universe and to require the economists to
substitute a study of "dynamics" for their alleged exclusive occupation with "statics." This so-called static method is precisely the proper
mental tool for the examination of change. There is no means of
studying the complex phenomena of action other than first to ab10. See below, pp. 251-252.

T h e Scope and Method of Catallactics

2 49

stract from change altogether, then to introduce an isolated factor
provoking chzngc, and ultimately to analyze its effects under the
assun~ptionthat other things remain equal. It is furthermore absurd
to believe that the services rendered by the construction of an evenly
rotating economy are the more valuable the more the object of our
studies, the r e a l ~ iof real action, corresponds to this construction in
respect to absence of change. T h e static method, the employment of
the imaginary construction of an evenly rotating economy, is the
only adequate method of analyzing the changes concerned without
regard to w-hether they are great or small, sudden or slow.
The objections hitherto raised against the use of the imaginary construction of an evenly rotating economy missed the mark entirely.
Their authors did not grasp in what respect this construction is problematic and why it can easily engender error and confusion.
Action is change, and change is in the temporal sequence. But in
the evenly rotating economy change and succession of events are
climinated. Action is to make choices and to cope with an uncertain
futurc. But in the evenly rotating economy there is no choosing and
the future is not uncertain as it docs not differ from the present known
state. Such a rigid system is not peopled with living men malting
choices and liable to error; it is a world of soulless unthinking automatons; it is not a human society, it is an ant hill.
These itlsoIuble contradictions, however, do not affect the service
which this imaginary construction renders for the only problem for
whose treatment it is both appropriate and indispensable: the problem
of the relation between the prices of products and those of the
factors required for their production, and the implied problems of
entrepreneurship and of profit and loss. In order to grasp the function of entrepreneurship and the meaning of profit and loss, wc construct a system from which they are absent. This image is merely a
tool for our thinking. It is not the description of a possible and realizable state of affairs. I t is even out of the question to carry the imaginary construction of an evenly rotating system to its ultimate
logical consequences. For it is impossible t o eliminate the entrepreneur from the picture of a rnarket economy. The various complementary factors of production cannot come together spontaneously.
T h e y need to be combined by the purposive efforts of men aiming
at certain ends and motivated'by the urge to improve their state of
satisfaction. In eliminating the entrepreneur one eliminates the driving
force of the whole market system.
Then there is a second deficiency. In the imaginarv construction of
an evenly rotating economy, indirect exchange and the use of money

z jo

Human Action

are tacitly implied. But what kind of money can that be? In a system
without change in which there is no uncertainty whatever about the
future, nobody needs to hold cash. Every individual knows precisely
what amount of money he will need at any future date. He is therefore in a position to lend all the funds he receives in such a way that
the loans fall due on the date he will need them. Let us assume that
there is only gold money and only one central bank. With the
successive progress toward the state of an evenly rotating economy
all individuals and firms restrict step by step their holding of cash
and the quantities of gold thus released flow into nonmonetary-industrial-employment. When the equilibrium of the evenly rotating
economy is finally rcached, there are no more cash holdings; no more
gold is used for monetary purposes. The individuals and firms own
claims against the central bank, the maturity of each part of which
precisely corresponds to the amount they will need on the respective
dates for the settlement of thcir obligations. The central bank does
not need any reserves as the total sum of the daily payments of its
customers exactly equals the total sum of withdrawals. All transactions can in fact be effected through transfer in the bank's books
without any recourse to cash. Thus the "money" of this system is
not a medium of exchange; it is not money at all; it is mereiy a nume'rai~e,an ethercal and undetermined unit of accounting of that
vague and indefinable character which the fancy of some economists
and the errors of many laymen mistakenly have attributcd to money.
The interposition of these numerical expressions between seller and
buyer does not affect the essence of the saIes; it is neutral with rega;d to the people's economic activities. But the notion of a neutral
money is unrealizable and inconceivable in itself.'* If we were to use
the inexpedient terminology employed in many contemporary economic writings, we would have to say: Money is necessarily a
"dynami~factor"; there is no room left for money in a "static" system. But the very notion of a market economy without money is selfcontradictory.
T h e imaginary construction of an evenly rotating system is a
limiting notion. In its frame there is in fact no longer any action.
Automatic reaction is substituted for the conscious striving of thinking man after the removal of uneasiness. W e can employ this problematic imaginary construction only if we never forget what purposes it
is designed to serve. W e want first of all to analyze the tendency, prevailing in every action, toward the establishment of an evenly rotating
economy; in doing so, we must always take into account that this
I r . Cf. below, pp. 413-416.

T h e Scope and Method of CataElactics

25 1

tendency can never attain its goal in a universe not perfectly rigid
and immutable, that is, in a universe which is living and not dead.
Secondly we need to comprehend in what respects the conditions of a
living world in which there is action differ from those of a rigid world.
This we can discover only by the argumenturn a contrario provided
b y the image of a rigid economy. Thus we are led t o the insight that
dealing with the uncertain conditions of the unltnown future-that
is, speculation-is inherent in every action, and that profit and loss
are necessary features of acting which cannot be conjured away by
any wishful thinking. T h e procedures adopted b y those economists
who are fully aware of these fundamental cognitions may be called
the logical method of economics as contrasted with the technique of
the mathema~icalmethod.
T h e mathematical economists disregard dealing with the actions
which, under the imaginary and unrealizable assumption that no further new data will emerge, are supposed to bring about the evenly
rotating economy. They do not notice the individual speculator who
aims not at the establishment of the evenly rotating economy hut at
profiting from an action which adjusts the conduct of affairs better
to the attainment of the ends sought by acting, the best possible removal of uneasiness. They stress excl~;sivel~
the imaginary state of
equilibrium which the whole complex of all such actions would attain
in the absence of any further change in the data. T h e y describe this
imaginary equilibrium by sets of simultaneous differential equations.
T h e y fail to recognize that the state of affairs they are dealing with is
a state in which there is no longer any action but only a succession of
events provoked by a mystical prime mover. They devote all their
efforts to describing, in mathematical symbols, various "equilibria,"
that is, states of rest and the absence of action. They deal with equilibrium as if it were a real entity and not a limiting notion, a mere
mental tool. What they are doing is vain playing with mathematical
symbols, a pastime not suited to convey any 1tnowledge.l2

6. The Stationary Economy
T h e imaginary construction of a stationary economy has sometimes been confused with that of an evenly rotating economy. Rut in
fact these two constructions differ.
T h e stationary economy is an economy in which the weaIth and
income of the individuals remain unchanged. With this image
12. For a further critical examination of mathematical economics see below,

pp- 347-354-

2j2

Human Action

changes are compatible which would be incompatible with the construction of the evenly rotating economy. Population figures may
rise o r drop provided that they are accompanied by a corresponding
rise or drop in the sum of wealth and income. The demand for some
commodities may change; but these changes must occur so slowly
that the transfer of capital from those branches of production which
are t o be restricted in accordance with them into those to be expanded can be effected by not replacing equipment used up in the
shrinking branches and instead investing in the expanding ones.
T h e imaginary construction of a stationary economy leads to two
further imaginary constructions: the progressing (expanding) economy and the retrogressing (shrinking) economy. In the former the
per capita quota of wealth and income of the individuals and the population figure tend toward a higher numerical value, in thc latter
toward a lower numerical value.
In thc stationary economy the total sum of all profits and of all
losses is zero. In the progressing economy the total amount of profits
exceeds the total amount of losses. In the retrogressing economy the
total amount of profits is smaller than the total amount of losses.
T h e precariousness of these three imaginary constructions is to be
seen in the fact that they inlply the possibility of the measurement
of wealth and income. As such measurements cannot be made and are
not even conceivable, it is out of the question to apply them for a
rigorous classification of the conditions of reality. Whenever economic history ventures to classify economic evolution within a certain period according to the scheme stationary, progressing, or retrogressing, it resorts in fact to historical understanding and does not
"mea~ure.~'

7. The Integration of Catallactic Functions
When men in dealing with the problems of their own actions, and
when economic hisrory, descriprive economics, and econu~ilicstatistics
in reporting other people's actions, employ the terms entrepreneur,
capitalist, landowner, worker, and consumer, they speak of ideal
types. When economics employs the same terms it speaks of cataIlactic categories. T h e entrepreneurs, capitalists, landowners, workers,
and consumers of economic theory are not living men as one meets
them in the reality of life and history. They are the embodiment of
distinct functions in the market operations. T h e fact that both acting men and historical sciences apply in their reasoning the results of
economics and that they construct their ideal types on the basis of

T h e Scope and Metbod of Catallactics
and with reference to the categories of praxeological theory, does
not modify the radical logical distinction between ideal type and
economic category. The economic categories we are concerned with
refer to purely integrated functions, the ideal types refer to historical
events. Living and acting man by necessity combines various functions. He is never merely a consumer. H e is in addition either an
entrepreneur, landowner, capitalist, or worker, or a person supported
by the intake earned by such people. Moreover, the functions of the
entrepreneur, the landowner, the capitalist, and the worker are very
often combined by the same persons. History is intent upon classifying men according to the ends they aim at and the means they employ for the attainment of these ends. Economics, exploring the
structure of acting in the market society without any regard to the
ends people aim at and the means they employ, is intent upon discerning categories and functions. These are two different tasks. The
difference can best be demonstrated in discussing the catallactic concept of the entrepreneur.
In the imaginary construction of the evenIy rotating economy there
is no room left for entrepreneurial activity, because this construction
eliminates any change of data that could affect prices. As soon as one
abandons this assumption of rigidity of data, one finds that action
must needs be affected by every change in the data. As action necessarily is directed toward influencing a future state of affairs, even if
sometimes only the immediate future of the next instant, it is affected
by evcry incorrectly anticipated change in the data occurring in the
period of time between its beginning and the end of the period for
which it aimed to provide (period of provision 1 3 ) . Thus the outcome
of action is always uncertain. Action is always speculation. This is
valid not only with regard to a market economy but no less for
Robinson Crusoe, the imaginary isolated actor, and for the conditions of a socialist economy. In the imaginary construction of an
evenly rotating system nobody is an entrepreneur and speculator. In
any reai and iiving economy every actor is aiways an entrepreneur
and speculator; the people taken care of by the actors-the minor
family members in the market society and the masses of a socialist
society--are, although themselves not actors and therefore not speculators, affected by the outcome of the actors' speculations.
Economics, in speaking of entrepreneurs, has in view not men, but
a definite function. This function is not the particular feature of a
special group or class of men; it is inherent in every action and burdens every actor. In embodying this function in an imaginary figure,
13. Cf. below, p. 478.

Human Action
we resort to a methodological makeshift. The term entrepreneur as
uscd b y catallactic theory means: acting man exclusively seen from
the aspect of the uncertainty inherent in every action. In using this
term one must ncver forget that every action is embedded in the
flux of time and therefore involves a speculation. T h e capitalists, the
landowners, and the laborers are by necessity speculators. So is the
consumer in providing for anticipated future needs. There's many
a slip 'twixt CUP and lip.
Let us try to think thc imaginary construction of a pure entrepreneur to its ultimate logical consequences. This entrepreneur does not
own any capital. T h e capital required for his entrepreneurial activities
is lent to him by the capitalists in the form of moncy loans. T h e law, it
is true, considers him the proprietor of the various means of production purchased by expending the sums borrowed. LTevertheless
he remains propertyless for the amount of his assets is balanced b y his
liabilities. If he succeeds, the net profit is his. If he fails, the loss must
fall upon thc capitalists who haw lent him the funds. Such an entrcpreneur u o d d , in fact, be an cmployee of the capitalists who speculates on their account and takes a loo per cent share in the net
profits without being concerned about the losses. But even if the
entrepreneur is in a position to provide himself a part of the capital
required and borrows only the rest, things are essentially not different. T o the extent that the Iosses incurred cannot be borne out of
rhe entrepreneur's own funds, they fall upon the lending capitalists,
whatever the terms of the contract may be. A capitalist is always also
virtually an entrepreneur and speculator. N e always runs the chance
of losing his funds. Thcre is no such thing as a pcrfectly safe investment.
T h e self-sufficient landowner who tills his estate only to supply his
own household is affected by all changes influencing the fertility of
his farm or the object of his needs. Within a market economy the
result of a farmer's activities is affected by all changes regarding the
importance of his piece of iand for suppiying the market. T h e farmer
is clearly, even from the point of view of mundane terminology, an
entrepreneur. S o proprietor of any means of production, whether
they are represented in tangible goods or in money, remains untouched by the unccrtainty of the future. The employment of any
tangible goods or money for production, i.e., the provision for later
days, is in itself an entreprcncurial activity.
Things arc essentially the same for the laborer. H e is born the
proprietor of certain abilities; his innate faculties are a means of
production which is better fitted for some kinds of work, less fitted

254

T h e Scope and Method of Catallactics
for others, and not at all fitted for still others.14 If he has acquired the
skill needed for the performance of certain kinds of labor, he is,
with regard to the timc and the material outlays absorbed by this
training, in the position of an investor. H e has made an input in the
expectation of being compensated by an adequate output. T h e laborer
is an entrepreneur in so far as his wages are determined by the price
the rnarket allows for the kind of work he can perform. This price
varies according to the change in conditions in the same way in which
the price of every other factor of production varies.
In the context of economic theory the meaning of the terms concerned is this: Entrepreneur means acting man in regard to the
changes occurring in the data of the market. Capitalist and landowner
mean acting man in regard to the changes in vaIue and price which,
even with all the market data remaining equal, are brought about
by the mere passing of time as a consequence of the different valuation of present goods and of future goods. Worker means man in regard to the employment of the factor of production human labor.
Thus every function is nicely integrated: the entrepreneur earns
profit or suffers loss; the owners of means of production (capita1
goods or land) earn originary interest; the workers earn wages. In
this sense we elaborate the imaginary construction of functiond d i s t ~ i bution as different from the actual historical distribution.16
Economics, howcver, always did and still does use the term "entrepreneur" in a sense other than that attached to it in the imaginary construction of functional distribution. It also calls entrepreneurs those
who are especially eager to profit from adjusting production to the
expected changes in conditions, those who have more initiative, more
venturesomeness, and a quicker eye than the crowd, the pushing and
promoting pioneers of economic improvement. This notion is nar14. In what sense labor is to be seen as a nonspecific factor of production see
above, pp. 133-135.
15. Let us emphasize again that everybody, laymen included, in dealing with
the problems of income determination always takes recourse to this Imaginzry
construction. The economists did not invent it; they only purged it of the deficiencies peculiar to the popular notion. For an epistemological treatment of
functional distribution cf. John Bates Clark, The Distribution of Wealth (New
York, 1908). p. 5 , and Eugen von Bohm-Rawerk, Geravzmelte Schriften, ed.
F.X. Weiss (Vienna, 1924)~p. 299. T h e tcrm "distribution" must not deceive anybody; its empIoyment in this context is to be cxplairled by the role played in the
history of economic thought by the imaginary construction of a socialist state (cf.
above, p. 240). There is in the operation of a market economy nothing which
could properly be called distribution. Goods are not first produced and then
distributed, as would be the case in a socialist state. The word "distribution" as
applied in the term "functional distribution" complies with the meaning attached
to "distribution" 150 years ago. In present-day English usage "distribution"
signifies dispersal of goods among consumers as effected by commerce.

256
Human Action
rower than the concept of an entrepreneur as used in the construction of functional distribution; it does not include many instances
which the latter includes. I t is awkward that the same term should
be uscd to signify two different notions. I t would have been more
expedient to employ another term for this second notion-for instance, the term "promoter."
I t is to be admitted that the notion of the entrepreneur-promoter
cannot be defined with praxeological rigor. (In this it is like the notion
of money which also defies-different from the notion of a medium
of exchange-a rigid praxeological defiuition.l6) However, economics
cannot do without the promoter concept. For it refers to a datum
that is a general characteristic of human nature, that is present in all
market transactions and marks them profoundly. This is the fact that
various individuals do not react to a change in conditions with the
same quickness and in the same way. T h e inequality of men, which is
due t o differences both in their inborn qualities and in the vicissitudes
of their lives, manifests itself in this way too. There are in the market
pacemakers and others who only imitate the procedures of their more
agile fellow citizens. T h e phenomenon of leadership is no less real on
the market than in any other branch of human activities. T h e driving
force of the market, the element tending toward unceasing innovation
and improvement, is provided by the restlessness of the promoter and
his eagerness to make profits as large as possible.
There is, however, no danger that the equivocal use of this term
may result in any ambiguity in the exposition of the catallactic system. Wherever any doubts are likely to appear, they can be dispelled by the employment of the term promoter insiead of entrepreneur.

T h e Entrepreneurial Function in the Stationary Economy
The futures market can relieve an entrepreneur of a part of his entrepreneurial function. As far as an entrepreneur has "insured" himself
through suitabie forward transactions against iosses he may possibiy suffer,
he ceases to be an entrepreneur and the entrepreneurial function devolves
on the other party to the contract. The cotton spinner who when buying
raw cotton for his mill sells the same quantity forward has abandoned a
part of his entrepreneurial function. H e will neither profit nor lose from
changes in the cotton price occurring in the period concerned. Of course,
he does not entirely cease to serve in the entrepreneurial function. Those
changes in the price of yarn in general or in the price of the special counts
and kinds he produces which are not brought about by a change in the
price of raw cotton affect him nonetheless. Even if he spins only as
16. Cf. below, p. 395.

The Scope and Method of Catallactics

257

a contractor for a remuneration agreed upon, he is still in an entrepreneurial
function with regard to the funds invested in his outfit.
W e may construct the image of an economy in which the conditions
required for the establishment of futures markets are realized for all kinds
of goods and services. In such an imaginary construction the entrepreneurial function is fulIy separated from all other functions. There emerges a
class of pure entrepreneurs. T h e prices determined on the futures markets
direct the whole apparatus of production. The dealers in futures alone
make profits and suffer losses. All other people are insured, as it were,
against the possible adverse effects of the uncertainty of the future. They
enjoy security in this regard. The heads of the various business units are
employees, as it were, with a fixed income.
If we further assume that this economy is a stationary economy and that
all futures transactions are concentrated in one corporation, it is obvious
that the total amount of losses precisely equals the total amount of profits.
W e need only t o nationalize this corporation in order to bring about a
socialist state without profits and losses, a state of undisturbed security
and stability. But this is so only because our definition of a stationary
economy implies equality of the total sum of losses and that of profits. In
a changing economy an excess either of profits or of losses must emerge.
It would be a waste of time t o dwell longer upon such oversophisticated
images which do not further the analysis of economic problems. T h e only
reason for mentioning them is that they reflect ideas which are at the
bottom of some criticisms made against the economic system of capitalism
and of some delusive plans suggested for a socialist control of business.
Now, it is true that a socialist scheme is logically compatible with the unrealizable imaginary constructions of an evenly rotating economy and of
a stationary economy. T h e predilection with which mathematical
economists almost exclusively deal with the conditions of these imaginary
constructions and with the state of "equilibrium" implied in them, has made
people oblivious of the fact that these are unreal, self-contradictory and
imaginary expedients of thought and nothing else. They are certainly not
suitable models for the construction of a living society of acting men.

XV. THE MARKET
I.

T h e Cllaracteristics of the Market E c o n o n ~ y

HE market economy is the social system of the division of labor

T

under private ownership of the means of production. Everybody acts on his own behalf; but everybody's actions aim at the
satisfaction of other people's needs as well as at the satisfaction of his
own. Everybody in acting serves his fellow citizens. Everybody, on
the other hand, is served by his fellow citizens. Everybody is both a
means and an end in himself; an ultimate end for himself and a means
to other people in their endeavors to attain their own ends.
This system is steered by the market. T h e market directs the individual's activities into thosc channels in which he best serves the wants
of his fellow men. There is in the operation of the marltet no compulsion and coercion. T h e state, the social apparatus of coercion and
con~pulsion,does not interfere with the market and with the citizens'
activities directed by the market. I t employs its power to beat people
into submission solely for the prevention of actions destructive to
the preservation arid the smooth operation of the market economy.
I t protects the individual's Life, health, and property against violent
or fraudulent aggression on the part of domestic gangsters and external foes. Thus the state creates and preserves the environment in
which the market economy can safely operate. T h e A4arxian slogan
"anarchic production'' pertinently characterizes this social structure
as an economic system which is not directed b y a dictator, a production tsar who assigns to each a task and compels hini to obey this
coiiiiii,aiid. Eacli maii is fi.ee; iiobody is s"bjeci to a &spot 0: his
own accord the individual integrates himself into the cooperative
system. T h e market directs him and reveals to him in what way he
can best promote his own welfare as well as that of other people.-~he
market is supreme. T h e market alone puts the whole social system
in order and provides it with sense and meaning.
T h e market is not a place, a thing, or a collective entity. T h e market
is a process, actuated by the interplay of the actions of the various
individuals cooperating undcr the di&ion of labor. T h e forces determining the-continually changing-state of the market are the

T h e Market

2.59

value judgments of these individuals and their actions as directed b y
these value judgments. T h e state of the market at any instant is the
price structure, i.e., the totality of the exchange ratios as established
b y the interaction of those eager to buy and those eager to sell. There
is nothing inhuman or mystical with regard to the market. T h e market process is entirely a resultant of human actions. Every market
phenomenon can be traced back to definite choices of the members
of the market society.
T h e market process is the adjustment of the individual actions of
the various members of the tnarket society to the requirements of
mutual cooperation. T h e market prices tell the producers what to
produce, how to produce, and in what quantity. T h e market is the
focal point to which the activities of the individuals converge. It ic
the center from which the activities of the individuals radiate.
The market economy must be strictly differentiated from the
second thinkable-although not realizable-system of social cooperation under the division of labor: the system of social or governmentaI
ownership of thc means of production. This second system is commonly called socialism, communism, planned economy, or state
capitalism. The market economy or capitalism, as it is usually called,
and the socialist economy preclude one another. There is no mixture
of the two systems possil~leor thinkable; there is no such thing as a
mixed economy, a system that would be in part capitalistic and
in part socialist. Production is directed either by the market or by the
decrees of a production tsar or a committee of production tsars.
If within a society based on private ownership of the means of
production some of these means are publicly owned and operatedthat is, owned and operated by the government or one of its agencies
-this does not make for a mixed system which would combine
socialism and capitalism. T h e fact that the state o r municipalities
own and operate some plants does not alter the characteristic features
of the market economy. These publicIy owned and operated enterprises are subject to the sovereignty of the market. They must fit
themselves, as buyers of raw materials, equipment, and labor, and as
sellers of goods and services, into the scheme of the market economy.
T h e y are subject to the laws of the market and thereby depend on
the consumers who .may or may not patronize them. They must
strive for profits or, at least, t o avoid losses. T h e government may
cover losses of its plants or shops by drawing on public funds. But
this neither eliminates nor mitigates the supremacy of the market; it
merely shifts it to another sector. For the means for covering the
losses~rnustbe raised by the imposition of taxes. But this taxation has

a 60

Human Action

its effects on the market and influences the economic structure according to the laws of the market. It is the operation of the market,
and not the government collecting the taxes, that decides upon whom
the incidence of the taxes falls and how they affect production and
consumption. Thus the market, not a government bureau, determines
the working of these publicly operated enterprises.
Kothing that is in any way connected with the operation of a
n~arltctis in the praxeological or economic sense to be called socialism.
T h e notion of socialism as conceived and defined by a11 socialists
implies the absence of a market for factors of production and of
prices of such factors. T h e "socialization" of individ~zalplants, shops,
and farms-that is, their transfer from private into public ownership
-is a method of bringing about socialism b y successive measures.
It is a step on the way toward socialism, but not in itself socialism.
(Marx and the orthodox Marxians flatly deny the possibility of such
a gradual approach to socialism. According t o their doctrine the
evolution of capitalism will one day reach a point in which at one
stroke capitalism is transformed into socialism.)
Government-operated enterprises and the Russian Soviet economy
are, b y the mere fact that they buy and sell on markets, connected
with the capitalist s j stem. T h e y themselves bear witness to this connection by calculating in terms of money. T h e y thus utilize the intellectual methods of the capitalist system that they fanatically condemn.
For monetary economic calculation is the intellectual basis of the
market economy. T h e tasks set to acting within any system of the
division of labor cannot be achieved without economic calculation.
T h e market economy calculates in terms of money prices. T h a t it is
capable of such calculation w-as instrumental in its evolution and conditions its present-day operation. T h e market economy is real because
it can calculatc.
2.

Capital

T h e mental tool of the market economy is economic calculation.
The fundamental notion of economic calculation is the notion of
cnpital and its correlative income.
T h e notions of capital and income as applied in accountancv and in
the mundane reflections of which accountancy is merely refinement, contrast the means and the ends. T h e calculating 14ind of the
actor draws a boundary line between the consumers' goods which he
plans to employ for the immediate satisfaction of his wants and the

a

The Market

261

goods of all orders-including those of the first order '-which he
plans to employ for providing, by further acting, for the satisfaction
of future wants. The differentiation of means and ends thus becomes
a differentiation of acquisition and consumption, of business and
househoId, of trading funds and of household goods. The whole
complex of goods destined for acquisition is evaluated in money terms,
and this sum-the capital-is the starting point of economic calculation. The immediate end of acquisitive action is to increase or, at
least, to preserve the capital. That amount which can be consumed
within a definite period without lowering the capital is called income.
If consumption exceeds the incomc available, the difference is called
capital consumption. If the income available is greater than the
amount consumed, the difference is called saving. Among the main
tasks of economic calculation are those of establishing the magnitudes
of income, saving, and capital consumption.
The reflections which led acting man to the notions implied in the
concepts of capital and income are latent in every premeditation
and planning of action. Even the most primitive husbandmen are
dimly aware of the consequences of acts which to a modern accountant would appear as capital consumption. The hunter's reluctance to
kill a pregnant hind and the uneasiness felt even by the most ruthless
warriors in cutting fruit trees were manifestations of a mentality
which was influenced by such considerations. These considerations
were prcsent in the age-old legal institution of usufruct and in
analogous customs and practices. Rut only people who are in a
position to resort to monetary calculation can evolve to full clarity
the distinction between an economic substance and the advantages
derived from it, and can apply it neatly to all classes, kinds, and orders
of goods and services. They alone can establish such distinctions
with regard to the perpetually changing conditions of highly developed processing industries and the complicated structure of the social
cooperation of hundreds of thousands of specialized jobs and perf ormances.
Looking backward*from the cognition provided by modern accountancy to the conditions of the savage ancestors of the human
race, wc may say metaphorically that they too used "capital." A
contemporary accountant could apply all the methods of his profession to their primitive tools of hunting and fishing, to their cattle
breeding and their tilling of the soil, if he knew what prices to assign
to the various items concerned. Some economists concluded thereI . For this man these goods are not goods of the first order, but goods of a
higher order, factors of further production.

262

Human Action

from that "capital" is a category of all human production, that it is
present in every thinkable system of the conduct of production
processes-i.e., no less in Robinson Crusoe's involuntary hermitage
than in a socialist society-and that it does not depend upon the
practice of monetary cal~ulation.~
This is, however, a confusion.
T h e concept of capital cannot be separated from the context of monetary calculation and from the social structure of a market economy
in which alone monetary calculation is possible. I t is a concept which
makes no sense outside the conditions of a market economy. I t plays
a role exclusively in the plans and records of individuals acting on
their own account in such a system of private ownership of the
means of production, and it developed with the spread of economic
calculation in monetary t e r r n ~ . ~
Modern accountancy is the fruit of a long historicaI evolution. T o day there is, among businessmen and accountants, unanimity with
regard to the meaning of capital. Capital is the sum of the money
equivalent of all assets minus the sum of the money equivalent of all
liabilities as dedicated at a definite date to the conduct of the operations of a definite business unit. It does not matter in what these assets
may consist, whether they are pieces of land, buildings, equipment,
tools, goods of any kind and order, claims, receivables, cash, or whatever.
It is a historical fact that in the early days of accountancy the
tradesmen, the pacemakers on the way toward monetary calculation,
did not for the most part include the money equivalent of their
lmildjngs and land in the notion of capital. It is another historical fact
that agriculturists were slow in applying the capital concept to their
land. Even today in the most advanced countries only a part of the
farmers are familiar with the practice of sound accountancy. Many
farmers acquiesce in a system of bookkeeping that neglects to pay
heed t o the land and its contribution to production. Their book entries
do not include the money equivalent of the land and are consequently
indiiierenr to changes in this equivaient. Such accounts are defeerive
because they fail to convey that information which is the sole aim
sought by capital accountink. They do not indicate whether or not the
operation of the farm has brought about a detcrioration in the land's
capacity to contribute to production, that is, in its objective use
value. If an erosion of the soil has taken place, their books ignore it,
and thus the calcdated income (net yield) is grcater than a more
complete method of bookkeeping would have shown.
t. Cf., e.g., R. v. Strigl, Kapital zrnd Produktion (Vienna, 19341, p. 3.

3. Cf. Frank A. Fetter in Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences. 111, IF.

The Market

263

It is necessary to mention these historical facts because they influenced the cndcavors of the economists to construct the notion of
real cnpital.
T h e economists were and are still today confronted with the superstitious belief that the scarcity of factors of production could be
brushed away, either entirely 'or at least to some extent, by increasing the amount of money in circulation and by credit expansion. In
order to deal adequately with this fundamental problem of economic
policy they considered it necessary to construct a notion of real
capital and to oppose it to the notion of capital as applied by the
businessman whose calculation refers to the whole complex of his
acquisitive activities. At the time the economists embarltcd upon thesc
endeavors the place of the money cqnivalem of land in the concept
of capital was still questioned. Thus the economists thought it reasonable to disregard land in constructing their notion of real capital.
They defined real capital as the totality of the produced factors of
production availabIe. Hairsplitting discussions were started as to
whether inventories of consumers' goods held by business units are
or are not real capital. But thcrc was almost unanimity that cash is
not real czpital.
RTow this concept of a totality of the produced factors of production is an empty concept. T h e money equivalent of the various
factors of production owned by a business unit can be determined and
summed up. But if we abstract from such an evaluation in money
terms, the totality of the produced factors of production is merely
an enumeration of physical quantities of thousands and thousands of
various goods. Such an inventory is of no use to acting. It is a description of a part of the universe in terms of technology and topography
and has no reference whatever to the problems raised b y the endeavors to improve human well-being. W e may acquiesce in the
terminologica1 usage of calling the produced factors of production
capital goods. But this does not render the concept of real capital any
more meaningful.
T h e worst outgrowth of the use of the mythical notion of real
capital was that economists began to speculate about a spurious problem called the productivity of (real) capital. A factor of production
is b y definition a thing that is able to contribute to the success of a
process of production. Its market price reflects entirely the value that
people attach to this contribution. T h e services expected from the
employment of a factor of production (i.e., its contribution to productivity) are in market transactions paid according to the full value
people attach to them. These factors are considered valuabIe only

264
Human Action
on account of these services. These services are the onIy reason why
prices are paid for them. Once these prices are paid, nothing remains
that can bring about further payments on the part of anybody as
a compensation for additional productive services of these factors of
production. It was a blunder to explain interest as an income derived
from the productivity of capital."
N o less detrimenta1 was a second confusion derived from the real
capital concept. People began to meditate upon a concept of social
capital as different from private capital. Starting from the imaginarv
construction of a socialist economy, they were intent upon defining
capital concept suitable to the economic activitics of the general manager of such a system. They were right in assuming that this manager
would be eager to know whether his conduct of affairs was successful (viz., from the point of view of his own valuations and the ends
aimed at in accordance with these valuations) and how much he could
expend for his wards' consumption without diminishing the available
stock of factors of production and thus impairing the yield of further production. A socialist government would badly need the concepts of capital and income as a guide for its operations. However, in
an economic system in which there is no private ownership of the
means of production, no market, and no prices for such goods, the
concepts of capital and income are mere academic postulates devoid
of any practical application. In a socialist economy there are capital
goods, but no capital.
T h e notion of capital makes sense only in the market economy. It
serves the deliberations and calculations of individuals or groups of
individuals operating on their own account in such an economy. It is
a device of capitalists, entrepreneurs, and farmers eager to make profits
and to avoid losses. It is not a category of all acting. I t is a category
of acting within a market economy.

a

3. Capitalism
All civilizations have up to now been based on private ownership
of the means of production. Tn the past civilization and private property have been linked together. Those who maintain that economics
is an experimental science and nevertheless recommend public control
of the means of production, lamentably contradict themselves. If
historical experience could teach us anything, it would be that private
property is inextricably linked with civilization. There is no ex4. Cf.below, pp. 522-531.

The Market
perience to the effect that socialism could provide a standard of living
as high as that provided by capitalism."
The system of market economy has never been fully and purely
tried. But there prevailed in the orbit of Western civilization since
the Middle Ages by and large a general tendency toward the abolition
of institutions hindering the operation of the market economy. With
the successive progress of this tendency, population figures multiplied
and the masses' standard of living was raised to an unprecedented and
hitherto undreamed of level. T h e average American worker enjoys
amenities for which Croesus, Crams, the Medici, and Louis XIV
would have envied him.
'The problems raised by the socialist and interventionist critique
of the market economy are purely economic and can be dealt with
only in the way in which this book tries to deal with them: by a
thorough analysis of human action and all thinkable systems of social
cooperation. T h e psychological problem of why people scorn and
disparage capitalism and call everything they dislike "capitalistic"
and everything they praise "socialistic" concerns history and must
be left to the historians. But there are several other issues which
we must stress at this point.
The advocates of totalitarianism consider "capitalism" a ghastly
evil, an awful illness that came upon mankind. In the eyes of Marx
it was an inevitable stage of mankind's evolution, but for all that the
worst of evils; fortunately salvation is imminent and will free man
forever from this disaster. In the opinion of other people it would
have been possible to avoid capitalism if only men had been more
moral or more skillful in the choice of economic policies. All such
lucubrations have one feature in common. They look upon capitalism
as if it were an accidental phenomenon which could be eliminated
without altering conditions that are essential in civilized man's acting
and thinking. As they neglect to bother about the problem of economic calculation, they are not aware of the consequences which the
abolition of the monetary calculus is bound to bring about. They do
not realize that socialist men for whom arithmetic will be of no use
in planning action, will differ entirely in their mentality and in their
mode of thinking from our contemporaries. In dealing with socialism,
we must not overlook this mental transformation, even if we were
ready to pass over in silence the disastrous consequences which wouId
result for man's material well-being.
5. For an examination of the Russian "experiment" see Mises, Planned Chaos
(Irvington-on-Hudson, 1947), pp. 80-87.

2 66

Human Action

T h e market economy is a man-made mode of acting under the
division of labor. But this does not imply that it is something accidental or artificial and could be replaced by another mode. T h e market economy is the product of a long evolutionary process. It is the
outcome of man's endeavors to adjust his action in the best possible
way t o the given conditions of his'environment that he cannot alter.
It is the strategy, as it were, by the application of which man has
triumphantly progressed from savagery to civilization.
This mode of argumentation is very popular among present-day
authors: Capitalism was thc economic system which brought about
the marvelous achievements of the last two hundred years; therefore it is done for because what was beneficial in the past cannot be
so for our time and for the future. Such reasoning is in open contradiction to the principlcs of experimental cognition. There is no
need at this point to raise again the question of whether or not the
science of human action can adopt the methods of the experimental
natural sciences. Even if it wcre permissible to answer this question in
the affirmative, it would be absurd to argue as these d rebours experi~nentalistsdo. Experimental science argues that because a was valid
in the past, it will be valid in the future too. It must never argue the
othcr way round and assert that because a was valid in the past, it is
not valid in the future.
It is customary to blame the economists for an alleged disregard of
history. The economists, it is contended, consider the market economy as the ideal and eternal pattcrn of social cooperation. They concentrate their studies upon investigating the conditions of thk market economy and neglect cvcrything else. T h e y do not bother about
the fact that capitalism emerged only in the last two hundred years
and that even today it is restricted to a comparatively small area of
the earth's surface and to a minority of peoples. There were and are
other civilizations with a different mentality and different modes of
COEd??CtiEg
eceger.ic afflirs.
C'onitolicm is, WhCIlS ~ C E~gyh r d w r i o
---r-------L
'r';"""
aeternitatis, a passing phenomenon, an ephemeral stage of historical
evolution, just the transition from precapitalistic ages to a postcapitalistic future.
A11 these criticisms are spurious. Economics is, of course, not a
branch of history or of any other historicaI science. It is the theory
of all human action, the general science of the immutable categories
of action and of their operation under all thinkable special conditions
under which man acts. It provides as such the indispensabIe mental
tool for dealing with historical and ethnographic problems. A historian or an ethnographer who neglects in his work to take full ad-

The Market

267

vantage of the resuIts of economics is doing a poor job. In fact he does
not approach the subject matter of his research unaffected by what
he disregards as theory. H e is at every step of his gathering of allegedly
unadulterated facts, in arranging these facts, and in his conclusions
derived from them, guided by confused and garbled remnants of
perfunctory economic doctrines constructed by botchers in the centuries preceding the elaboration of an economic science and long
since entirely exploded.
The analysis of the problems of the market society, the only pattern of human action in which calculation can be applied in planning
action, opens access to the analysis of all thinkable modes of action
and of all economic problems with which historians and ethnographers are confronted. All noncapitalistic methods of economic
management can be studied only under the hypothetical assumption
that in them too cardinal numbers can be used in recording past action
and planning future action. This is why economists place the study of
the pure market economy in the center of their investigations.
It is not the economists who lack the "historical sense" and ignore
the factor of evolution, but their critics. The economists have always
been fully aware of the fact that the market economy is the product
of a long historical process which began when the human race
emerged from the ranks of the other primates. T h e champions of
what is mistakenly called "historicism" are intent upon undoing the
effects of evolutionary changes. In their eyes everything the existence
of which they cannot trace back to a remote past or cannot discover
in the customs of some primitive Polynesian tribes is artificial, even
decadent. They consider the fact that an institution was unknown to
savages as a proof of its uselessness and rottenness. Marx and Engels
and the Prussian professors of the E-Iistorical School exulted when
they learned that private property is "only" a historical phenomenon.
For them this was the proof that their socialist plans were reali~able.~
T h e creative genius is at variance with his fellow citizens. As the
pioneer of things new and unheard of he is in conflict with their
uncritical acceptance of traditional standards and values. In his eyes
the routine of the regular citizen, the average or common man, is
6. T h e most amazing roduct of this widespread method of thought is the
book of a Prussian pro essor, Bernhard Laum (Die geschlossene Wirtschaft
[Tiibingen, 19331). Laum assembles a vast collection of quotations from ethnographical writings showing that many primitive tribes considered economic
autarky as natural, necessary, and motally good. H e concludes from this that
autarky is the natural and most expedient state of economic management and
that the return to autarky which he advocates is "a biologically necessary process"

f

(p. 491).

t 68

Human Action

simply stupidity. For him "bourgeois" is a synonym of imbecility.?
T h e frustrated artists who take delight in aping the genius's mannerism
in order to forget and to conceal their own impotence adopt this
terminology. These Bohemians call everything they dislike "bourgeois." Since Marx has made the term "capitalist" equivalent to
"bourgeois," they use both words synonymously. In the vocabularies
of all languages the words "capitalistic" and "bourgeois" signify today all that is shameful, degrading, and i n f a m o u ~ . ~
Contrariwise,
people call all that they deem good and praiseworthy "socialist." T h e
regular scheme of arguing is this: A man arbitrarily calls anything he
dislikes "capitalistic," and then deduces from this appellation that the
thing is bad.
This semantic confusion goes still further. Sisrnondi, the romantic
eulogists of the Middle Ages, all socialist authors, the Prussian Historical School, and the American Institutionalists taught that capitalism
is an unfair system of exploitation sacrificing the vital interests of the
majority of people for the sole benefit of a small group of profiteers.
No decent man can advocate this "mad" system. T h e economists who
contend that capitalism is beneficial not only to a small group but to
everyone are "sycophants of the bourgeoisie." They arc either too
dull to recognize the truth or bribed apologists of the selfish class interests of the exploiters.
Capitalism, in the terminology of these foes of liberty, democracy,
and the market economy, means the economic policy advocated by
big business and millionaires. Confronted with the fact that somebut certainly not all-wealthy entrepreneurs and capitalists nowadays
favor measures restricting free trade and competition and resulting in
monopoly, they say: Contemporary capitalism stands for protection7. Guy de Maupassant analyzed Flaubert's alleged hatred of the bourgeois in
Etude srrr Gustave Flaubert (rcprinted in Oeuvres complhtes d e Gustawe Flaw
bert [Paris, 18851, Vol. VII). Flaubert, says Maupassant, "aimait le monde" (p.
67); that is, he liked to move in the circle of Paris society composed of aristocrats, wealthy bourgcois, and the Clitc of artists, writers, philosophers, scientists,
statesmen, and cntrepreneurs (promoters). H e used the term bourgeois as
synonymous with imbecility and defined it this way: "I call a bourgeois whoever
has mean thoughts (pense bassement)." Hence it is obvious that in employing
the term bourgeois Flaubert did not have in mind the b o ~ r ~ ~ e o ias iae social class,
but a kind of imbecility he most frequently found in this class. He was full of
contempt for the common man (Ye born peuple") as well. However, as he had
more frequent contacts with the "gens d u monde" than with workers, the stupidity of the former annoyed him more than that of the latter (p. 5 9 ) . These
observations of Maupassant held good not only for Flaubert, but for the "antibourgeois" sentiments of all artists. Incidentally, it must be emphasized that from
a Marxian point of view Flaubert is a "bourgeois" writer and his novels arc an
"ideological superstructure" of the "capitalist or bourgeois mode of production."
8. T h e ZITazisused "Jewish" as a synonym of both "capitalist" and "bourgeois."

The Market

2 6y

ism, cartels, and the abolition of competition. It is true, they add, that at
a definite period of the past British capitalism favored free trade both
on the domestic market and in international relations. This was because at that time the class interests of the British bourgeoisie were
best served by such a policy. Conditions, however, changed and today capitalism, i.e., the policy advocated by the exploiters, aims at
another policy.
It has already been pointed out that this doctrine badly distorts
both economic theory and historical facts? There were and there
will always be people whose selfish ambitions demand protection for
vested interests and who hope to derive advantage from measures
restricting competition. Entrepreneurs grown old and tired and the
decadent heirs of people who succeeded in the past dislike the agile
parvenus who challenge their wealth and their eminent social position.
Whether or not their desire to make economic conditions rigid and
to hinder improvements can bc realized, depends on the climate of
public opinion. The ideological structure of the nineteenth century
as fashioned by the prestige of the teachings of the liberal economists
rendered such wishes vain. When the technological improvements
of the age of liberalism rcvolutionized the traditional methods of
production, transportation, and marketing, those whose vested interests were hurt did not ask for protection because it would have been
a hopeless venture. Rut today it is deemed a Iegitimate task of government to prevent an efficient man from cotnpeting with the less efficient. Public opinion sympathizes with the demands of powerful
pressure groups to stop progress. The butter producers are with considerable success fighting against margarine and the musicians against
recorded music. The labor unions are deadly foes of every new
machine. It is not amazing that in such an environment less efficient
businessmen aim at protection against more efficient competitors.
It would be correct to describe this state of affairs in this way: Today many or some groups of business are no longer liberal; they do
not advocate a pure market economy and free enterprise, but, on
the contrary, are asking for various measures of government interference with business. But it is entirely misleading to say that the
meaning of the concept of capitalism has changed and that "mature
capitalismv-as the Americans call it--or "late capitalism7'-as the
Marxians call it-is characterized by restrictive policies to protect
the vested interests of wage earners, farmers, shopkeepers, artisans,
and sometimes also of capitalists and entrepreneurs. The concept of
capitalism is as an economic concept immutable; if it means anything,
9. Cf. above, pp. 81-84.

2 70

Human Action

it means market economy. One deprives oneself of the semantic tools
to deal adequately with the problems of contemporary history and
economic policies if one acquiesces in a different terminology. This
faulty nomenclature becomes understandable only if we realkc that
the pseudo-economists and the politicians who apply it want to prevent people from knowing what the market economy really is. They
want to make people believe that all the repulsive manifestations of
restrictive government policies are produced by "capitalism."

4. The Sovereignty of the Consumers
The direction of all economic affairs is in the market society a
task of the entrepreneurs. Theirs is the control of production. They
are at the helm and stcer the ship. A superficial observer would believe that they are supreme. But they are not. They are bound to
obey unconditionally the captain's orders. The captain is the consumer. Ncither the entrcpreneurs nor the farmers nor the capjtaljsts
determine what has to be produced. The consurncrs do that. If a businessman does not strictly obey the orders of the public as they are
conveyed to him by the structure of market prices, he suffers losses,
he goes bankrupt, and is thus removed from his eminent position at
the helm. Other men who did better in satisfying the demand of the
consumers replace him.
The consumers patronize those shops in which they can buy what
they want at the cheapest price. Their buying and their abstention
from buying decides who should own and run the plants and the land.
They make poor pcople rich and rich people poor. They determine
precisely what should be produced, in what quality, and in what
quantities. They are merciless egoistic bosses, full-of whims and
fancies, changeable and unpredictable. For them nothing counts other
than their own satisfaction. They do not care a whit for past merit
and vested interests. If something is offered to them that they like
better or that is cheaper, they desert their old purveyors. In their
capacity as buyers and consumers they are hard-hearted and callous,
without consideration for other people.
Only the sellers of goods and services of the first order are in direct
contact with the consumers and directly depend on their orders. But
they transmit the orders received from the public to all those producing goods and services of the higher orders. For the manufacturers
of consumers' goods, the retailers, the service trades, and the professions are forced to acquire what they need for the conduct of their
own business from those purveyors who offer them at the cheapest

The Market
price. If they were not intent upon buying in the cheapest market
and arranging their processing of the factors of production so as to
fill the dcmands of the consumers in the best and chcapest way, they
wonld be forced to g o out of business. Morc efficient men who
succeeded better in buying and processing the factors of production
would supplant thcm. 'The consumer is in a position to give free rein
t o his caprices arid fancies. T h e entrcpreneurs, capitalists, and farmers
have thcir hands tied; they are bound to comply in their operations
with the orders of the brlying public. Evcn- deviation from the lincs
prescribed by the demand of the consunkrs debits thcir account.
T h e slightest deviation,whether willfully brought about or caused by
error, bad judgment, or inefficiency. restricts thcir profits or makes
then1 disappear. A lnorc scrious deviation results in losses and thus
impairs or cntirely absorbs their wcalth. Capitalisrs, entrepreneurs,
and landowners can only prescrve and increase thcir wealth by filling
best thc orders of thc consumers. T h e y arc not free LO spend money
which the consumers arc riot prepared to refund to them in paying
more for thc products. In thc condrict of thcir busincss affairs they
mnust be unfeeling and stony-hearted beca~lscthe consumers, their
l)osses, arc themselves unfeeling and stony-hearted.
T h c consumers dctermine ultimately not only thc priccs of thc consumers' goods, but no lcss the prices of a11 factors of production. T h e y
determine thc income of cvery membcr of the market economy. The
consumers, not thc cntreprcneurs, pay ultimatcIy the wages earned
by every worker, the glamorous movic star as well as the charwoman.
With every penny spent the consumers determine thc direction of
all production processes and the minutest details of the organization
of all busincss activities. This state of affairs has been described by
calling the marltct a democracy in which cvery penny gives a right
t o cast a ballot.'0 It would be more correct to say that a dcmacratic
constitution is 3 schenlc t o assign to the citizens in the conduct of
government the same suprcrnacy the market cconomy givcs them in
their capacity as consnmcrs. However, thc comparison is imperfcct.
In the political democracy only thc votcs cast for the majority candidate or the majority plan are effective in shaping the course of affairs.
T h e votes polled 1)). the minoritv do not directly influcncc policics.
But on the market no votc is cas; in vain. Every penny spent has the
power t o M-orkupon the production processcs. T h e publishers cater
not only to the majority by publishing detective stories, but aIso t o
the minority reading lyrical poetry and philosophical tracts. T h e
10. Cf. Frank A. Fetter, The Principles of Economics (jd cd. New Yark, r g r j ) ,
pp. 3 9 4 4'0.

272

Human Action

bakeries bake bread not only for healthy people, but also for the
sick on special diets. T h e decision of a consumer is carried into effect
with the full momentum he gives it through his readiness to spend a
dcfinite amount of money.
It is true, in the market the various consumers have not the same
voting right. T h e rich cast more votes than the poorer citizens. But
this inequality is itself the outcome of a previous voting process. T o
be rich, in a pure market economy, is the outcome of success in filling
best the demands of the consumers. A wealthy man can preserve his
wealth only b y continuing t o serve the consumers in the most efficient
way.
T h u s the owners of the material factors of production and the
entrepreneurs are virtually mandataries or trustees of the consumers,
revocably appointed b y an election daily repeated.
There is in the operation of a market economy only one instance in
which the proprietary class is nor completely subject to the supremacy of the consumers. hlonopoly prices are an infringement of the
sway of the consumers.

T h e Metaphorical Employment of the Terminology
of Political Rule
The orders given by businessmen in the conduct of their affairs can be
heard and seen. hTobodycan fail to become aware of them. Even messenger
boys know that the boss runs things around the shop. But it requires a
little more brains to notice the entrepreneur's dependence on the market.
The orders given by the consumers are not tangible, thy cannot be perceived by the senses. Many people lack the discernment to take cognizance
of them. They fa11 victim to the deIusion that entrepreneurs and capitalists
are irresponsible autocrats whom nobody calls to account for their
actions.ll
The outgrowth of this mentality is the practice of applying to business
the terminology of political rule and military action. Successful businessmen are called kings or dukes, their enterprises an empire, a kingdom, or a
dukedom. If this idiom were only a harmless metaphor, there would be no
need to criticize it. But it is the source of serious errors which play a sinister role in contemporary doctrines.
Government is an apparatus of compulsion and coercion. It has the
power to obtain obedience by force. The political sovereign, be it an autocrat or the people as represented by its mandataries, has power to crush
rebellions as Iong as his ideological might subsists.
The position which entrepreneurs and capitalists occupy in the market
I I. Beatrice Webb, Lady Passfield, herself the daughter of a wealthy businessman, may be quoted as an outstanding example of this mentality. Cf. My Apprenticeship (New York, 1926)~
p. 42.

The Market
economy is of a different character. A "chocolate king" has no power over
the consumers, his patrons. H e provides them with chocolate of the best
possible quality and at the cheapest price. H e does not rule the consumers,
he serves them. T h e consumers are not tied to him. They are free to stop
patronizing his shops. H e loses his "kingdom" if the consumers prefer to
spend their pennies elsewhere. Nor does he "rule" his workers. H e hires
their services by paying them precisely that amount which the consumers
are ready to restore to him in buying the product. Still less do thc capitalists and entrepreneurs exercise political control. T h e civilized nations of
Europe and America were long controlled by governn~entswhich did not
considerably hinder the operation of the market economy. Today many of
these countries too arc dominated by parties which are hostile to capitalism
and believe that every harm inflicted upon capitalists and entrepreneurs is
extremely beneficial to the people.
In an unhampered market economy the capitalists and cntrepreneurs
cannot expect an advantage from bribing officeholdcrs and politicians. On
the other hand, the officeholders and politicians are not in a position to
blackmail businessmen and to eFtort graft from them. In an interventionist
country powerful pressure groups are intent upon securing for their mernbers privileges at the expense of weaker groups and individuals. Then the
businessmen may deem it expedient to protect themselves against discriminatory acts on the part of the executive officers and the legislature by
bribery; once used to such methods, they may even try to employ them
in order to secure privileges for themselves. A t any rate the fact that businessmen corrupt politicians and officeholders and are blackmailed by such
people does not indicate that they are supreme and rule the countries. It is
those ruled-and not the rulers-who bribe and are paying tribute.
The majority of businessmen are prevented from resorting to bribery
either by their moral convictions or by fear. They venture to preserve the
free entcrprise system and to defend themselves against discrimination by
Iegitimate dcnlocratic methods. They form trade associations and try to
influence public opinion. The results of these endeavors have been rather
poor, as is evidenced by the triumphant advance of anticapitalist policies.
T h e best that they have been able to achieve is to delay for a while somc
especially obnoxious measures.
Demagogues misrepresent this state of affairs in the crassest way. They
tell us that these associations of bankers and manufacturers are the true
rulers of their countries and that the whole apparatus of what they call
'cplut~democraZic"government is dominated b y them. A simple enumeration of the laws passed in the last decades by any country's legislature is
enough to explode such legends.
j. Competition

In nature there prevail irreconcilable conflicts of interests. T h e
means of subsistence are scarce. Proliferation tends to outrun sub-

274

Human Action

sistence. Only the fittest plants and animals survive. The antagonism
between an animal starving to death and another that snatches the
food a\vay from it is implacable.
Social cooperation under the division of labor removes such antagonisms. It substitutes partnership and mutuality for hostility. The
members of society are united in a common venture.
T h e term competition as applied to the conditions of animal life
signifies the rivalry between animals which manifests itself in their
search for food. W e may call this phenomenon biological competition. Biological competition must not be confused with social competition, i.e., the striving of individuals to attain the most favorable
position in the systcm of social cooperation. As there will always be
positions which men value more highly than others, people will strive
for them and try to outdo rivals. Social competition is consequently
present in every conceivable mode of social organization. If u7ewant
to think of a state of affairs in which there is no social competition,
w-e must construct the image of a socialist system in which the chief
in his endeavors to assign to everybody his place and task in society
is not aided by any ambition on the part of his subjects. The individuals are entirely indifferent and do not apply for special appointments.
They behave like the stud horses which do not try to put themselves
in a favorable light when the owner picks out the stallion to impregnate his best brood mare. But such people would no longer be
acting men.
In a totalitarian system social competition manifests itself in the
endeavors of people to court the favor of those in power. In the
market economy competition manifests itself in the facts that the
sellers must outdo one another by offering better or cheaper goods
and services and that the buyers must outdo one another by offering
higher prices. In dealing with this variety of social competition which
may be called cntallactic competition, we must guard ourselves against
various popular fallacies.
T h e classical economists favored the abolition of all trade barriers
preventing people from competing on the market. Such restrictive
laws, they explained, result in shifting production from those places
in which natural conditions of production are more favorable to
places in which they are less favorable. They protect the less efficient
man against his more efficient rival. They tend to perpetuate backward technological methods of production. In short thcy curtail
production and thus lower the standard of living. In order to make
a11 people more prosperous, the economists argued, competition
should be free to everybody. In this sense they used the term free

T h e Ma~ket

275

com9etition. There was nothing metaphysical in their employment
of the term free. They advocated the nullification of privileges barring
people from access to certain trades and markets. All the sophisticated
lucubrations caviling at the metaphysical connotations of the adjective free as applied to con~petitionare spurious; they have no reference
whatcver to the catallactic problem of competition.
As far as natural conditions come into play, competition can only
be "free" with regard to those factors of production which are not
scarce and thcrefore not objects of human action. In the catallactic
field competition is always restricted by the inexorable scarcity of
the economic goods and services. Even in the absence of institutional
barriers erected to restrict the number of those competing, the state
of affairs is never such as to enable everyone to compete in all sectors
of the markct. In each sector only comparatively small groups can
engage in competition.
Carallactic competition, one of the characteristic features of the
market economy, is a social phenomenon. It is not a right, guaranteed
by the state and the laws, that would makc it possible for every individual to choose ad libitum the place in the structure of the division
of labor he likes best. T o assign to everybody his proper place in
society is the task of the consumers. Their buying and abstention
from buying is instrumental in determining each individual's social
position. Their supremacy is not impaired by any priviIeges granted
to the individuals qua producers. Entrance into a definite branch
of industry is virtually free to newcomers only as far as the consumers approve of this branch's expansion or as far as the newcomers
succeed in supplanting those already occupied in it by filling better
or more cheaply the demands of the consumers. Additional investment is reasonable only to the extent that it fills the most urgent among
the not yet satisfied needs of thc consumers. If the existing plants are
sufficient, it would be wasteful to invest more capital in the same
industry. The structure of market prices pushes the new investors
into other branches.
It is necessary to emphasize this point because the failure to grasp
it is at the root of many popular complaints about the impossibility
of competition. Some fifty years ago people used to declare: You
cannot compete with thc railroad companies; it is impossible to challenge their position by starting competing lines; in the field of
land transportation therc is no longer competition. The truth was
that at that time the already operating lines were by and large sufficient. For additional capital investment the prospects were more
favorable in improving the serviceableness of the already operating

Human Action
lines and in other branches of business than in the construction of
new railroads. However, this did not interfere with further technological progress in transportation technique. T h e bigness and the
economic "power" of the railroad companies did not impede the
emergence of the motor car and the airplane.
Today people assert the same with regard t o various branches of
big business: You cannot challenge their position, they are too big
and too powerful. But competition does not mean that anybody can
prosper by simply imitating what other people do. It means tge opportunity to serve the consumers in a better or cheaper way without
being restrained by privileges granted to those whose vested interests the innovation hurts. What a newcomer who wants to defy the
vested interests of the old established firms needs most is brains and
ideas. If his project is fit to fill the most urgent of the unsatisfied needs
of the consumers or to purvey them at a cheaper price than their old
purveyors, he will succeed in spite of the much tallied of bigness and
power of the old firms.
Catallactic competition must not be confused with prize fights and
beauty contests. T h e purpose of such fights and contests is to discover
~ v h ois the best boxer or the prettiest girl. The social function of
catallactic competition is, to be sure, not to establish who is the
smartest boy and to reward the winner by a title and medals. Its
function is to safeguard the best satisfaction of the consumers which
they can attain under the given state of the economic data.
Equality of opportunity is a factor neither in prize fights and beauty
contests nor in any other field of competition, whether biological or
social. T h e immense majority of people are by the physiological
structure of rheir bodies deprived of a chance to attain the honors
of a boxing charnpion or a beauty queen. Only very few people can
compete on the labor market as opera singers and movie stars. T h e
most favorablc opportunity to compete in the field of scientific
achievement is provided to the university professors. Yet, thousands
and c'nousands of professo~spass away withoiii leavifig afiy trace
in the history of ideas and scientific progress, w-hile many of the
handicapped outsiders win glory through marvelous contributions.
It is usual to find fault with the fact that catallactic competition is not
open to everybody in the same way. T h e start is much more difficult
for a poor boy than for the son of a wealthy man. But the consumers
are not concerned about the problem of whether or not the men who
shall serve them start their careers under equal conditions. Their only
interest is to secure the best possible satisfaction of their needs. If the
system of hereditary property is more efficient in this regard, they

T h e Market

277

prefer it to other less efficient systems. They look at the matter from
the point of view of social expediency and socia1 welfare, not from
the point of view of an alleged, imaginary, and unrealizable "natural"
right of every individual to compete with equal opportunity. The
realization of such a right would require placing at a disadvantage
those born with better intelligence and greater will power than the
average man. It is obvious that this would be absurd.
The term competition is mainly employed as the antithesis of
monopoly. In this mode of speech the term monopoly is applied in
different meanings which must be clearly separated.
The first connotation of monopoly, very frequently implied in the
popular use of the term, signifies a state of affairs in which the
monopolist, whether an individual or a group of individuals, exclusively controls one of the vital conditions of human survival. Such a
monopolist has the power to starve to death all those who do not
obey his orders. H e dictates and the others have no alternative but
either to surrender or to die. With regard to such a monopoly there
is no market or any other kind of catallactic competition. The monopolist is the master and the rest are slaves entirely dependent on
his good graces. There is no need to dwell upon this kind of monopoIy.
It has no reference whatever to a market economy. It is enough to
cite one instance. A world-embracing socialist state would exercise
such an absolute and total monopoly; it would have the power to
crush its opponents by starving them to death.12
The second connotation of nlonopoly differs from the first in
that it describes a state of affairs compatible with the conditions of
a market economy. A monopolist in this sense is an individual or a
group of individuals, fully combining for joint action, who has thc
exclusive control of the supply of a definite commodity. If we define
the term monopoly in this way, the domain of monopoly appears
very vast. The products of the processing industries are more or less
different from one another. Each factory turns out products different
from those of the other plants. Each hoiel has a monopoly on the sale
of its services on the site of its premises. The professional services
rendered by a physician or a lawyer are never perfectly equal to
those rendered by any other physician or lawyer. Except for certain
raw materials, foodstuffs, and other stapIe goods, monopoly is everywhere on the market.
However, the mere phenomenon of nlonopoly is without any
significance and relevance for the operation of the market and the
1 2 . Cf. Trotsky (1937) as quoted by Hayek, The Rpad to Serfdom (London,
1944)3 p. 89.

278
Human Action
determination of prices It does not give the monopolist any advantage in selling his products. Under copyright Iaw every rhymester
enjoys a monopoly in the salc of his poetry. But this does not influence
the market. It may happen that no price whatever can be realized for
his stuff and that his books can only be sold at their waste paper value.
Monopoly in this second connotation of thc term becomes a factor
in the determination of prices only if the demand curve for the
monopoly good concerned is shaped in a particular way. If conditions
are such that the monopolist can secure higher net proceeds by selling
a smaller quantity of his product at a higher price than by selling a
greater quantity of his supply at a lower price, there emerges a
monopoly price higher than the potential market price would have
been in the absence of monopoly. Monopoly prices are an important
market phenomenon, while monopoly as such is only important if it
can result in the formation of monopoly prices.
It is customary to calI prices which are not monopoly prices competitive prices. While it is questionable whether or not this terminology is expedient, it is generalIy acceptedmd it would he difficnlt to
change it. But onc must guard oneself against its misinterpretation. It
would be a serious bIunder to deduce from the antithesis between
monopoly price and competitive price that the monopoly price is the
outgrowth of the absence of competition. There is always catallactic
competition on the market. Catallactic competition is no less a factor
in the determination of monopoly prices than it is in the dctcrmination
of competitive prices. The shapc of the demand curve that makes
the appearance of monopoly prices possible and directs the monopolists' conduct is determined by the competition of a11 other commodities competing for the buyers' dollars. The higher the monopolist
fixes the price at which he is ready to sell, the more potential buyers
turn their dollars toward other vendible goods. On the market every
commodity competes with all other commodities.
There are people who maintain that the catallactic theory of prices
is of no use for the study of reality because there has never been "frce"
competition or because, at least today, there is no longer any such
thing. All these doctrines are wrong.13 They misconstrue the phenomena and simply do not know what competition really is. It is a
fact that the history of the last decades is a record of policies aiming
at the restriction of competition. It is the manifest intention of these
schemes to grant privileges to certain groups of producers by pror 3. For a refutation of the fashionable doctrines of imperfect and of monopolistic competition cf. I?. A. Hayelr, Individualism and Economic Order (Chicago,
1948), pp. 92-118.

The Market

2

79

tecting them against the competition of more efficient competitors.
In many instances these policies have brought about the conditions
required for the emergence of monopoly priccs. In many other instances this was not the case and the result was only a state of affairs
preventing many capitalists, entrepreneurs, farmers, and workers
from entering those branches of industry in which they would have
rendered the most valuable services to their fellow citizens. Catallactic
competition has been seriously restricted, but the market economy is
still in operation although sabotaged by government and labor union
interference. T h e system of catallactic competition is still functioning although the productivity of labor has been seriously reduced.
It is the ultimate end of these anticompetition policies to substitute
for capitalism a socialist system of planning in which there is no
catallactic competition at all. While shedding crocodile tears about
the decline of competition, the planners want to abolish this "mad"
competitive system. They have attained their goal in some countries.
But in the rest of the world they have only restricted competition in
some branches of business by increasing the number of people competing in other branches.
The forces aiming at a restriction of cornpctition play a great role
in our day. It is an important task of the history of our age to deal
with them. Economic theory has no need to refer to them in particular. The fact that there are trade barriers, privileges, cartels, government monopolies and labor unions is merely a datum of economic
history. It does not rcquire special theorems for its interpretation.

6. Freedom
The words freedom and liberty signified for the most eminent
representatives of mankind one of the most precious and desirable
goods. Today it is fashionable to sneer at them. They are, trumpets
the modern sage, "slipper$' notions and "bourgeois" prejudices.
Freedom and liberty are not to be found in nature. In nature there
is no phenomenon to which these terms could be meaningfully applied. Whatever man does, he can never free himself from the restraints which nature imposes upon him. If he wants to succeed in
acting, he must submit unconditionally to the laws of nature.
Freedom and liberty always refer to interhuman relations. A man
is free as far as he can live and get on without being at the mercy
of arbitrary decisions on the part of other people. In the frame of
society everybody depends upon his fellow citizens. Social man cannot become independent without forsaking all the advantages of

Human Action
social cooperation. T h e self-sufficient individual is independent, but
he is not free. He is at the mercy of everybody who is stronger than
himself. The stronger fellow has the power to l d l him with impunity.
I t is therefore nonsense to rant about an alleged "natural" and "inborn"
freedom which people are supposed to have enjoyed in the ages
preceding the emergence of social bonds. Man was not created free;
what freedom he may possess has been given to him by society. Only
societal conditions can present a man with an orbit within the limits
of which he can attain liberty.
Liberty and freedom are the conditions of man within a contractual society. Social cooperation under a system of private ownership of the means of production means that within the range of the
market the individual is not bound to obey and to serve an overlord.
As far as he gives and serves other people, he does so of his own accord
in order to be rewarded and served by the receivers. IIe exchanges
goods and services, he does not do compulsory labor and does not pay
tribute. H e is certainly not independent. H e depends on the other
members of society. But this dependence is mutual. T h e buyer depends on the seller and the seller on the buyer.
T h e main concern of many writers of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries was to misrepresent and to distort this obvious state of
affairs. T h e worlters, they said, are at the mercy of their employers.
Now, it is true that the employer has the right to fire the employee.
But if he makes use of this right in order to indulge in his whims, he
hurts his own interests. It is to his own disadvantage if he discharges
a better man in order to hire a less efficient one. T h e market does
not directIy prevent anybody from arbitrarily inflicting harm on his
fellow citizens; it only puts a penalty upon such conduct. T h e shopkeeper is free to be r ~ ~ d
to chis customers provided he is ready to bear
the consequences. T h e consumers are free to boycott a purveyor provided they are ready to pay the costs. What impels every man to the
utmost eicrtion in the service of his fellow men and curbs innate
tendencies toward arbitrariness and maiice is, in the market, not compulsion and coercion on the part of gendarmes, hangmen, and,penal
courts; it is self-interest. T h e ~nemberof a contractual society is free
because he serves others only in serving himself. What restrains him
is only the inevitable natural phenomenon of scarcity. For the rest
he is free in the range of the market.
There is no kind of freedom and liberty other than the kind which
the market economy brings about. In a totalitarian hegemonic society
the only freedom that is left to the individual, because it cannot be
denied to him, is the freedom to commit suicide.

The M h k e t

28 I

T h e state, the social apparatus of coercion and compulsion, is by
necessity a hegemonic bond. If government were in a position to
expand its power ad libitum, it could abolish the market economy
and substitute for it all-round totalitarian socialism. In order to prevent this, it is necessary to curb the power of government. This is the
task of all constitutions, bills of rights, and laws. This is the meaning
of all the struggles which men have fought for liberty.
The detractors of libcrty arc in this sense right in calling it a "bourgeois" issue and in blaming the rights guaranteeing liberty for being
negative. In the realm of state and government, lihcrty means restraint
imposed upon the exercise of the police power.
Liberty and freedom are terms employed for the description of
the social conditions of the individual mcmbers of a market society in
which the power of the indispensable hegemonic bond, the state, is
curbed lest the operation of the market be endangered. In a totalitarian
system there is nothing to which the attribute "free" could be attached
hut the unlimited arbitrariness of the dictator.
There would be no need to dwell upon this obvious fact if the
champions of the abolition of liberty had not purposely brought about
a semantic confusion. Thcy realized that it was hopeless for them to
fight openly and sincerely for restraint and servitude. T h e notions
liberty and freedom had such prestige that no propaganda could
shake their popularity. Since time immemorial in the realm of Western civilization liberty has been considered as the most precious good.
W h a t gave to the West its eminence was precisely its concern about
liberty, a social ideal foreign to the oriental peoples. The social
philosophy of the Occident is essentially a philosophy of freedom.
T h e main content of the history of Europe and the conlmunities
founded by European emigrants and their descendants in other parts
of the world was thc struggle for liberty. "R~lgged" individualism is
the signature of our civilization. ATo open attack upon the freedom
of the individual had any prospect of success.
Thus the advocates of totalitarianism chose other tactics. They
reverscd the meaning of words. Thcy call true or genuine liberty the
condition of the individuals under a system in which they ha;e no
right other than to obey orders. They call themseIves true liberals
because they strive after such a social ordcr. They call democracy
the Russian methods of dictatorial government. T h e y call the labor
union methods of violence and coercion "industrial democracy."
T h e y call freedom of the press a state of affairs in which only the
government is free to publish books and newspapers. They define
liberty as the opportunity to do the "right" things, and, of course,

282

Human Action

they arrogate to themselves the determination of what is right and
what is not. In their eyes government omnipotence means full liberty.
T o free the police power from all restraints is the true meaning of
their struggle for freedom.
T h e market economy, say these self-styled liberals, grants liberty
only to a parasitic class of exploiters, the bourgeoisie. These scoundrels enjoy the freedom to enslave the masses. T h e wage earner is not
free; he must toil for the sole benefit of his masters, the employers. The
capitalists appropriate to themselves what according to the inalienable rights of man should beIong to the worker. Under socialism the
worker will enjoy freedom and human dignity because he will no
longer have to slave for a capitalist. Socialism means the emancipation
of the common man, means freedom for all. It means, moreover, riches
for all.
These doctrines have been able to triumph because they did not
encounter effectivc rational criticism. Some economists did a brilliant
job in unmasking their crass fallacies and contradictions. But the
public ignores the teachings of economics. They are too heavy for
the readers of tabloids and pulp magazines. The arguments advanced
by average politicians and writers against socialism are either silly or
irrelevant. It is useless to stand upon an alleged "natural" right of individuals to own property if other people assert that the foremost
"natural" right is that of income equality. Such disputes can never be
settled. It is beside the point to criticize nonessential, attendant features of the socialist program. One does not refute socialism bv attacking the socialists' stand on religion, marriage, birth control; and
art. Morcover, in dealing with such matters the critics of socialism
were often in the wrong. Thus, for instance, they were so inept as to
turn the disapproval of the Bolshevist persecution of the Russian
Church into an approbation of this debased, adamantly intolerant
church and its superstitious practices.
In spite of these serious shortcomings of the defenders of economic
freedom it was impossible to fool all the people all the time about
the essential features of socialism. The most fanatical planners were
forced to admit that their projects involve the abolition of many
freedoms pcople enjoy under capitalism and "plutodemocracy."
Pressed hard, they resorted to a new subterfuge. The freedom to be
abolished, fhey emphasize, is merely the spurious "economic" freedom
of the capitalists that harms the common man. Outside the "economic
sphere" freedom will not only be fully preserved, but considerably
expandcd. "Planning for Freedom" has lately become the most

T h e Market

283

popular slogan of the champions of totalitarian government and the
Russification of all nations.
T h e fallacy of this argument stems from the spurious distinction
between two realms of human life and action, entirely separated from
one another, viz., the "economic" sphere and the "noneconomic"
sphere. W i t h regard to this issue there is no need to add anything to
what has been said in the preceding pnrts of this book. IIon.ever,
there is another point to be stressed.
Freedom, as people enjoyed i t in the democratic countries of Western civilization in the years of the old liberalism's triumph, was not a
product of constitutions, bills of rights, laws, and statutes. Those
documents aimed only at safeguarding liberty and freedom, firmly
established by the operation of the market economy, against encroachments on the part of officeholders. N o
and no
civil law can guarantee and bring about freedom otheru.ise than hv
supporting and defending the fundamental institutions of the markdt
economy. Government means always coercion and compulsion and
is by necessity the opposite of liberty. Government is a guarantor of
liberty and is compatibk with liberty only if its range is adequately
restricted t o the preservation of economic freedom. Where there is
no market economy, the best-intentioned provisions of constitutions
and laws remain a dead letter.
T h e freedom of man under capitalism is an effect of competition.
T h e worker does not depend on the good graces of an employer. If
his employer discharges him, he finds another employer.I4 The consumer is not at the mercy of the shopkeeper. H e is free to patronize
another shop if he likes. Nobody must Itiss other people's hands or
fear their disfavor. Interpersonal relations are businesslike. T h e exchange of goods and services is mutual; it is not a favor to sell or to
buy, it is a transaction dictated b y selfishness on either side.
It is true that in his capacity as a producer every man depends
either directly-e.g., the entrepreneur-or indirectly-e.g., the hire:
worker-on the demands of the consumers. However, this dependence
upon the supremacy of the consumers is not unljmited. If a man has
a weighty reason for defying the sovereignty of the consumers, he
can try it. There is in the range of the market a very substantial and
effective right t o resist oppression, Nobody is forced to go into the
liquor industry o r into a gun factory if his conscience objects. H e
may have to pay a price for his conviction; there are in this world
n o ends the attainment of which is gratuitous. But it is left to a man's
14. See below, pp. 595-596.

284
Human Action
own decision t o choose between a material advantage and the call of
what he believes to be his duty. In the market economy the individual
alone is the supreme arbiter in matters of his satisfaction.15
Capitalist society has no means of compelling a man to change his
occupation or his place or work other than to reward those complying
with the wants of the consumers by higher pay. It is precisely this
kind of pressure which many people consider as unbearable and hope
to see abolished under socialism. T h e y are too dull to realize that the
only alternative is t o convey t o the authorities full power to determine in what branch and at what place a man should work.
In his capacity as a consumer man is no less free. H e alone decides
what is more and what is less important for him. H e chooses how to
spend his money according t o his own will.
T h e substitution of econon~icplanning for the market economy
removes all freedom and leaves to the individual merely the right to
obey. T h e authority directing all econon~icmatters controls all
aspects of a man's life and activities. It is the only employer. All
labor becomes compulsory labor because the employee must accept
what the chief deigns to offer him. T h e economic tsar determines
what and how much of each the consumer may consume. There is
no sector of human life in which a decision is lcft to the individual's
value judgments. T h e authority assigns a definite task to him, trains
him for this job, and employs him at the place and in the manner it
deems expedient.
As soon as the economic freedom which the market economy grants
to its members is removed, all political liberties and bills of rights
become humbug. Habeas corpus and trial b y jury arc a sham if, under
the pretext of economic expediency, the authority has full power
to relegate every citizen it dislikes t o the arctic or to a desert and t o
assign him "hard labor" for life. Freedom of the press is a mere blind
15. I n the political sphere resistance to oppression racticed by the established
government is the ultiwa ratio of those oppressed. &owever illegal and unbearabie the oppression, however iofty and nohie the motives of the rebeis, and however beneficial the consequenccs of their violent resistance, a revolution is always an illegal act, disintegrating the established order of state and government.
It is an essential mark of civil government that it is in its territory the only
agency which is in a position to resort to measures of violence or to declare legitimate whatever violence is practiced by other agencies. A revolution is an act of
warfare between the citizens, it abolishes the very foundations of legality and is
at best restrained by the questionable international customs concerning belligerency. If victorious, it can afterwards establish a new legal order and a new government. But it can never enact a legal "right to resist oppression." Such an impunity
granted to people venturing armed resistance to the armed forces of the government is tantamount to anarchy and incompatible with any mode of government.
The Constituent Assembly of the first French Revolution was foolish enough to
decree such a right; but it was not so foolish as to take its own decree seriously.

The Market

285

if the authority controls all printing offices and paper plants. And so
are a11 the other rights of men.
A men has freedom as far as he shapes his life according to his own
plans. A man whose fate is dctermined by the plans of a superior
authority, in which the cxclusivc power to plan is vested, is not free
in the sensc in which this term "free" was used and understood by
all people until the semantic revolution of our day brought about
a confusion of tongues.

7. Inequality of Wealth and Income
The incquality of individuals with regard to wealth and income
is an essential feature of the market economy.
The fact that freedom is incompatible with equality of wcaIth and
income has been stressed by man; authors. ~ h e i e
is no need to enter
into an examination of the emotional arguments advanced in these
writings. Neither is it necessary to raise the question of whether the
rcnunciation of liberty could in itself guarantee the establishment
of equality of wcalth and income and whether or not a society could
subsist on the basis of such an cquality. Our task is merely to describe
the role inequality lays in the framework of the nlarlrct society.
In the market society direct compulsion and coercion are practiced
only for the sake of preventing acts detrimental to social cooperation.
For the rest individuals are not molested by the police power. The
law-abiding citizen is free from the interference of jailers and hangmen. What pressure is needed to impel an individual to contribute his
share to the cooperative effort of production is exercised by the price
structure of the market. This pressure is indirect. It puts on each individual's contribution a premium graduated according to thc value
which the consumers attach to this contribution. In rewarding the
individual's effort according to its value, it leaves to everybody the
choice between a more or less complete utilization of his own faculties
and abilities. This method can, of conrse, not eliminate t!w dlsadvantages of inherent personal inferiority. But it provides an incentive to
everybody to exert his faculties and abilities to the utmost.
The only alternative to this financial pressure as cxercised by the
market is direct pressure and compulsion as exercised by the police
power. The authorities must be entrusted with the task of determining
the quantity and quality of work that each individual is bound to perform. As ii~dividualsare unequal with regard to their abilitics, this
rcquires an examination of thcir personalities on the part of the
authorities. The individual beconics an inmate of a penitentiary, as it
were, to whom a definite task is assigned. If he fails to achieve what

286

Human Action

the authorities have ordered him to do, he is liable to punishment.
It is important to realize in what the difference consists benveen
direct pressure exercised for the prevention of crime and that exercised for the extortion of a definite performance. In the former case
all that is required from the individual is to avoid a certain mode of
conduct, precisely determined by law. As a rule it is easy to establish
whether or not this interdiction has been observed. In the second case
the individual is liable to accomplish a definite task; the law forces
him toward an indefinite action, the determination of which is left
to the decision of the executive power. T h e individual is bound to
obey whatever the administration orders him to do. Whether or not
the command issued by the executive power was adequate to his
forces and faculties and whether or not he has complied with it to
the best of his abilities is extremely difficult to establish. Every citizen
is with regard to all aspects of his personality and with regard to all
manifestations of his conduct subject to the decisions of the authorities. In the market economy in a trial before a penal court the prosecutor is obliged to produce sufficient evidence that the defendant
is guilty. But in matters of the performance of compulsory work it
devolves upon the defendant to prove that the task assigned to him
was beyond his abilities or that he has done all that can be expected
of him. The administrators combine in their persons the offices of the
legislator, the executor of the law, the public prosecutor, and the
judge. The defcndants are entirely at their mercy. This is what people
have in mind when speaking of lack of freedom.
No system of the social division of labor can do without a method
that makes individuals responsible for their contributions to the
joint productive effort. If this responsibility is not brought about by
the price structure of the market and the inequality of wealth and
income it hegcts, it must be enforced by the methods of direct compulsion as practiced by the police.

8. Entrepreneurial Profit and Loss
Profit, in a broader sense, is the gain derived from action; it is
the increase in satisfaction (decrease in uneasiness) brought about;
it is the difference between the higher vaIue attached to the result
attained and the lower value attached to the sacrifices made for its
attainment; it is, in other words, yield minus costs. T o make profit
is invariably the aim sought by any action. If an action fails to attain
the ends sought, yield either does not exceed costs or lags behind

The Market

287

costs. In the latter case the outcome means a loss, a decrease in satisfaction.
Profit and loss in this original sense are psychic phenomena and as
such not open to measurement and a mode of expression which could
convey to other people precise information concerning their intensity. A man can tell a fellow man that a suits him better than b; but
he cannot communicate to another man, except in vague and indistinct
terms, how much the satisfaction derived from a exceeds that derived from b.
In the market economy all those things that are bought and sold
against money are marked with money prices. In the monetary calculus
profit appears as a surplus of money received over money expended
and loss as a surplus of money expended over money received. Profit
and loss can be expressed in definite amounts of money. It is possible
to ascertain in terms of money how much an individual has profited
or lost. However, this is not a statement about this individual's psychic
profit or loss. It is a statement about a social phenomenon, about the
individual's contribution to the societal effort as it is appraised by the
other members of society. It does not tell us anything about the
individual's increase or decrease in satisfaction or happiness. It merely
reflects his fellow men's evaluation of his contribution to social cooperation. This evaluation is ultimately determined by the efforts of
every rnembcr of society to attain the highest possible psychic profit.
It is the resultant of the composite effect of all these people's subjective and personal value judgments as manifested in their conduct
on the market. But it must not be confused with these value judgments
as such.
W e cannot even think of a state of affairs in which people act without the intention of attaining psychic profit and in which their actions
result neither in psychic profit nor in psychic loss.16 In the imaginary
construction of an evenly rotating economy there are neither money
profits nor money losses. But every individual derives a psychic profit
from his actions, or else he would not act at all. T h e farmer feeds
and milks his cows and sells the milk because he values the things
he can buy against the money thus earned more highly than the costs
expended. The absence of money profits or losses in such an evenly
rotating system is due to the fact that, if we disregard the differences
16. If an action neither improves nor impairs the state of satisfaction, it still
involves a psychic loss because of the uselessness of the expended psychic effort.
T h e individual concerned would have been better off if he had inertly enjoyed
lie.

288

Human Action

brought about by the higher valuation of present goods as co111pared with future goods, the sum of the prices of all complementary
factors needed for production precisely equals the price of the
product.
In the changing world of reality differences between the sum of the
prices of the complementary factors of production and the prices of
the products emerge again and again. I t is these differences that bring
about money profits and money losses. ,4s far as such changes affect
the sellers of labor and those of the original nature-given factors of
production and of the capitalists as moneylenders, we will deal with
them later. At this point we are dealing with entrepreneurial profit
and loss. It is this problem that people have in mind when employing
the terms profit and loss in mundane speech.
Like every acting man, thc entrepreneur is always a speculator. H e
deals with the uncertain conditions of the future. His success or
failure depends on the correctness of his anticipation of uncertain
events. If he fails in his understanding of things t o come, he is doomed.
The only source from which an entrepreneur's profits stem is his
ability to anticipate better than other people the future demand of
the consumers. If everybody is correct in anticipating the future state
of the market of a certain con~modity,its price and the prices of the
complementary factors of production concerned would already today
be adjusted to this future state. Xeither profit nor loss can emerge for
those embarking upon this line of business.
T h e specific entrepreneurial function consists in determining the
employment of the factors of production. T h e entrepreneur is the
man who dedicates them to special purposes. In doing so he is driven
solely by the selfish interest in making profits and in acquiring wealth.
But he cannot evade the law of the market. H e can succeed only by
hest serving the consumers. His profit depends on the approval of
his conduct by the consumers.
One must not confuse entrepreneurial profit and loss with other
factors affecting the entrepreneur's proceeds.
T h e entrepreneur's technological ability does not affect the spccitic
entrepreneurial profit or loss. As far as his own technological activities
contribute to the returns earned and increase his net income, we are
confronted with a compensation for work rendered. It is wages paid
to the entrepreneur for his labor. Neither does the fact that not every
process of production succeeds technologically in bringing about the
product expected, influence the specific entrepreneurial profit or
loss. Such failures are either avoidable or unavoidable. In the first case
they are due to the technoIogically inefficient conduct of affairs. Then

the losses resulting are tu be debited to the entrepreneur's personal
insuficicncy, i.e., either to his lack of technological ability or to his
lack of the ability to hire adequate helpers. In the second case the
failures arc due to the fact that the present state of t c c h n o l o ~ i ~ a l
knowledge prevents us from fully controlling the condltiom on
which success depends. This deficiency nlay be caused either by incomplete knowledge concerning the conditions of success or by
ignorance of neth hods for controlhng fully sonic of the Icnon 11conditions. The price of the factors of production takes into account this
unsatisfactory state of our Itnowledge and technological pou er. 'I'he
price of arable land, for instance, takes into full account the fact that
there are bad harvests, as it is determined by the anticipated average
yield. T h e fact that the bursting of bottles reduces the output of
champagne docs not affect entrepreneurial profit and loss. It is nlerelv
one of the factors determining the cost of production and the p i c e
of champagne.I7
Accidents affecting the process of production, thc nleans of production, or the products while they are still in the hands of the entrepreneur arc an itern in the bill of production costs. Experience, \t hich
conveys t o the businessman all other technological Ixlowledge, provides jlim also u i t h inforniatiol~about the average reduction in the
quantity of physical output which such accidents are likely to Ilring
about. By opening contingent reserves, 11c converts their effects into
regular costs of production. With rcgarcl to contingencies the expected incidence of which is too rare and too irregular ro be dealt
with in this u ay b y ~ndividualfirms of normal size, concerted action
on the part of suficiently large groups of firms takes care of the
matter. T h e individual &ms cooperate under the principle of insurance against damage caused by fire, flood, or other similar contingencies. Then an insurance premium ib substituted for an appropriation to a contingency reserve. A t any rate, the risks incurred by
accidents d o not introduce uncertainty into the conduct of the technojogicai processes.'"If
an entrepreneur neglects to deal with then1
duly, he gives proof of his technical insufficiency. ' l h losses thus
incurred are to be debited to bad techniques applied, not to his
entrepreneurial function.
T h e elimination of those entrepreneurs who fail to give to their
enterprises the adequate degree of technological efficiency or v hose
17. Cf. Mangoldt, Die L e h e vom Unternebmergewinn (Leipig, 18551, p. 82.
T h e fact that out of loo liters o f plain wine one cannot produce roo lltcrs of
champagne, but a smaller quantity, has the same significance as the fact that loo
kilograms of sugar beet do not yield loo kilograms of sugar but a smaller quantiry.
18. Cf. Knight, Risk, Uncertainty and Profit (Boston, 1 9 2 I ) , pp. 2 11-2'3.

2 yo

H m a n Action

tcchnological ignorance vitiates their cost calculation is effected on
thc marlxt in the same way in which those deficient in the perfornlancc of the specific entrepreneurial functions are eliminated. It
may happen that an entrepreneur is so successful in his specific entreprencurial function that he can compensate losses caused by his
technological failurc. It may also happen that an entrepreneur can
counterbalance losses due to failure in his entrepreneurial function
I,y the advantages derived from his technological superiority or from
the differential rent yielded b y the higher productivity of the factors
of production he employs. But one must not confuse the various
functions which are combined in the conduct of a business unit. T h e
technologically more efficient entrepreneur earns higher wage rates
or quasi-wage rates than the less eficient in the same way in which
the more efficient Lvorker earns more than the less efficient. T h e more
cflicient machine and the more fertile soil produce higher physical
returns per unit of costs expended; they yield a differential rent
whcn compared with the less efficient machine and the less fertile
soil. 'The higher wage rates and the higher rent are, ceteris paribus,
the corollary of higher physical output. But the specific entrepreneurial profits and losses are not produced by the quantity of physical
output. They depend on the adjustment of output to the most urgent wants of the consumers. W h a t produces them is the extent t o
lvhich the entrepreneur has succeeded or failed in anticipating the
future-necessarily uncertain-state of the market.
T h e entrepreneur is also jeopardized by political dangers. Governrr~entpolicies, revolutions, and wars can damage or annildate his
enterprise. Such events do not affect him alone; they affect the market economy as such and all individuals, although not all of them to
the same exient. For the individual entrepreneur they are data which
he cannot alter. If he is efficient, he will anticipate them in time. But
it is not always possible for him to adjust his operations in such a way
as to avoid damage. If the dangers expected concern only a part of
the territory w-hich is accessible to his entrepreneurial activities, he
can avoid operating in the menaced areas and can prefer countries in
which the danger is less imminent. But if he cannot emigrate, he must
stay where he is. If all entrepreneurs were fully convinced that the
total victory of Bolshevism was impending, they would nevertheless not abandon their entrepreneurial activities. he expectation of
imminent expropriation will impel the capitalists t o consume their
funds. T h e entrepreneurs will be forced t o adjust their plans t o the
market situation created b y such capital consumption and the threatened nationalization of their shops and plants. But they will not stop

The Market

291

operating. If some entrepreneurs go out of business, others will take
their place-newcomers or old entreprcneurs expanding the size of
their enterprises. In the market economy there will always be entrepreneurs. Policies hostile to capitalism may deprive the consumers of
the greater part of the benefits they would have reaped from unhampered entrepreneurial activities. But they cannot eliminate the
entrepreneurs as such if they do not entirely destroy the market
economy.
The ultimate source from which entrepreneurial profit and loss are
derived is the uncertainty of the future constellation of demand and
supply.
If all entrepreneurs were to anticipate correctly the future state
of the market, there would be neither profits nor losses. T h e prices
of all the factors of production would already today be fully adjusted
to tomorrow's prices of the products. In buying the factors of production the entrepreneur would have to expend (with due allowance
for the difference between the prices of present goods and future
goods) no less an amount than the buyers will pap him later for the
product. An entreprcneur can make a profit only if he anticipates
future conditions more correctly than other entreprcneurs. Then he
buys the coniplcmcntary factors of production at prices the sum of
which is smaller than the price at which he sells the product.
If we want to construct the image of changing economic conditions in which there are neither profits nor losses, we must resort to
an unrealizable assumption: perfect foresight of all future events on
the part of all individuals. If those primitive hunters and fishermen to
whom it is customary to ascribe the first accumulation of produced
factors of production had known in advance a11 the future vicissitudes
of human affairs, and if they and all their descendants until the last
day of judgment, equipped with the same omniscience, had appraised
all factors of production accordingly, entrepreneurial profits and
losses would never have emerged. Entrepreneurial profits and losses
are created through the discrepancy between the expected prices and
the prices later really fixed on the markets. It is possible to confiscate
profits and to transfer them from the individuals to whom they have
accrued to other people. But ncither profits nor losses can ever disappear from a changing world not populated solely with omniscient
people.

zg2

Human Action
9. Entrcprencurial Profits and Losses in a Progressing
Economy

In the imaginary construction of a stationary economy the total sum
of all entrepreneurs' profits equals the total sum of all entrepreneurs'
losses. What one entrepreneur profits is in the total economic system
counterbalanced by another entrepreneur's loss. T h e surplus which
all the consumers together expend for the acquisition of a certain
commodity is counterbdanced by the reduction in their expenditure
for the acquisition of other commodities.'"
It is different in a progressing economy.
W e call a progressing economy an economv in which the per capita
quota of capital invested is increasing. In &ing this term we do not
imply value judgments. W e adopt neither the "materialistic" view
that such a progression is good nor the "idealistic" view that it is bad
or a t least irrelevant from a "higher point of view." Of course, it is
a well-linown fact that the immense majority of people consider the
consequences of progress in this sense as the most desirable state of
affairs and yearn for conditions which can be realized only in a progressing economy.
In the stationary economy the entrepreneurs, in the pursuit of their
specific functions, cannot achieve anything other than to withdraw
factors of production, provided that they are still c o n ~ c r t i b l e , ~ ~
from one line of business in order to employ them in another line, or
to direct the restoration of the equivalent of capital goods used up
in the course of production processes toward the expansion of certain branches of industry at the expense of other branches. In the
progressing economy the range of entrepreneurial activities includes,
moreover, the determination of the employment of the additional
capital goods accumulated by new savings. T h e injection of these
additiona1 capital goods is bbund to increase the total sum of the
income produced, i.e., of that supply of consumers' goods which can
be consu~nedwithout diminishing the capital equipment used in its
production and thereby without impairing the output of future
production. T h e increase of income is effected either by an expansion of production without altering the technological methods of
production or by an improvement in technoIogica1 methods which
19. If we were to appIy the faulty concept of a "national income" as used in
popular speech, we would have to say that no part of national income goes into
profits.
20. The problem of the convertibility of capital soods is dealt with below, pp.
4Wj05.

The Market
would not have been feasible under the previous conditions of a less
ample supply of capital goods.
It is out of this additional wealth that the surplus of the total sum of
entrepreneurial profits over the total sum of entrepreneurial losses
flows. But it can be easily demonstrated that this surplus can never
exhaust the total increase in wealth brought about by economic progress. T h e laws of the market divide this additional wealth between
the entrepreneurs and the suppliers of labor and those of certain
material factors of production in such a way that thc lion's share goes
to the nonentrepreneurial groups.
First of all we must realize that entrepreneurial profits are not a
lasting phenomenon but only temporary. There prcvails an inherent
tendency for profits and losses to disappear. The market is always
moving toward the emergence of the final prices and the finaI state
of rest. If new changes in the data were not to interrupt this movement and not to create the need for a new adjustment of production
t o the altered conditions, the prices of all complementary factors of
production would-due allowance being rnade for time preference
-finally equal the price of the product, and nothing would be left for
profits or losses. In the long run every increase in productivity benefits exclusively the workers and some groups of the owners of land
and of capital goods.
In the groups of the owners of capital goods there are benefited:
I . Those whose saving has increased the quantity of capital goods
available. They own this additional wealth, the outcome of their
restraint in consuming.
2. The owners of those capital goods already previously existing
which, thanks to the improvement in technological methods of production, are now better utilized than before. Such gains are, of course,
temporary only. They are bound to disappear as they cause a tendency toward an intensified production of the capital goods concerned.
On the other hand, the increase in the quantity of capital goods
available lowers the marginal productivity of capital; it thus brings
about a fall in the prices of the capital goods and thereby hurts the
interests of all those capitalists who did not share at all or not sufficiently in the process of saving and the accumulation of the additional
supply of capital goods.
In the group of the landowners all those are benefited for whom
the new state of affairs results in a higher productivity of their farms,
forests, fisheries, mines, and so on. On the other hand, all those are
hurt whose property may become submarginal on account of the
higher return yielded by the land owned by those benefited.

294
Human Action
In the group of labor all derive a lasting gain from the increase in
the marginal productivity of labor. But, on the other hand, in the
short run some may suffer disadvantages. These are people who were
specialized in the performancc of work which becomes obsolete
as a result of technological improvement and are fitted only for jobs
in which-in spite of the general rise in wage rates-they earn less
than before.
All these changes in the prices of the factors of production begin
immediately with the initiation of the entrepreneurial actions designed
to adjust the processes of production to the new state of affairs. In
dealing with this problem as with the other problems of changes in
the market data, we must guard ourselves against the popular fallacy
of drawing a sharp line between short-run and long-run effects. What
happens in the short run is precisely the first stages of the chain of
successive transformations which tend to bring about the long-run
effects. The long-run effect is in our case the disappearance of entrepreneurial profits and losses. The short-run effects are the preliminary
stages of this process of elimination which finally, if not interrupted
by a further change in the data, would result in the cmergence of
the evenly rotating economy.
It is necessary to comprehend that the very appearance of an excess in the total amount of entrepreneurial profits ovcr the total
amount of entrepreneurial losses depends upon the fact that this
process of the elimination of entrepreneurial profit and loss begins at
the same time as the entrepreneurs begin to adjust the complex of
production activities to the changed data. There is never in the whole
sequence of events an instant in which the advantages derived from
the increase in the amount of capital available and from technical
improvements benefit the entrepreneurs only. If the wealth and the
income of the other strata were to remain unaffected, these people
couId buy the additional products only by restricting their purchases of other products accordingly. Thcn the profits of one group
of entrepreneurs would exactly equal the losses incurred by other
groups.
What happens is this: The entrepreneurs embarking upon the utilization of the newly accumulated capital goods and the improved
technological methods of production are in need of complementary
factors of production. Their demand for these factors is a new additional demand which must raise their prices. Only as far as this rise
in prices and wage rates occurs, are the consumers in a position to buy
the new products without curtailing the purchase of other goods.

The Market
Only so far can a surplus of the total sum of a11 entrepreneurial profits
over all entrepreneurial losses come into existence.
The vehicle of economic progress is the accumulation of additional
capital goods by means of saving and improvement in technological
methods of production the execution of which is almost always conditioned by the availability of such new capitaI. The agents of progress
are the promoting entrepreneurs intent upon profiting by means of
adjusting the conduct of affairs to the best possible satisfaction of the
consumers. In the performance of their projects for the realization of
progress they are bound to share the benefits derived from progress
with the workers and also w-ith a part of the capitalists and landowners
and to increase the portion allotted to these people step by step until
their own sharc melts away entirely.
From this it becomes evident that it is absurd to speak of a "rate
of profit" or a "normal rate of profit" or an "average rate of profit."
Profit is not related to or dependent on the amount of capital employed by the entreprcneur. Capital does not "beget" profit. Profit
and loss are entircly determined by the success or failure of the
entrepreneur to adjust production to the demand of the consumers.
There is nothing "normal" in profits and there can never be an
"equilibrium" with regard to them. Profit and loss are, on the contrary,
always a phenomcnon of a deviation from "normalcy," of changes
unforeseen by the majority, and of a "disequilibrium." They have
no place in an imaginary world of normalcy and equilibrium. In a
changing cconomy there prevails always an inhercnt tendency for
profits and losses to disappear. It is only the cmergencc of new changes
which revives them again. Under stationary conditions the "average
of the total amount of
rate" of profits and losses is zero. An
profits over that of losses is a proof of the fact that there is economic
progress and an improvement in the standard of living of all strata
of the population. The greater this excess is, the greater is the increment in general prosperity.
R4any people are utterly unfit to deal with the phenomenon of
entrepreneurial profit without indulging in envious resentment. In
their eyes the source of profit is exploitation of the wage earners and
the consumers, i.e., an unfair reduction in wage rates and a no less
unfair increase in the prices of the products. By rights there should
not be any profits at all.
Economics is indifferent with regard to such arbitrary vaIue judgments. It is not interested in the problem of whether profits are to be
approved or condemned from thc point of view of an alleged natural

excess

296
Human Action
law and of an alleged eternal and immutable code of morality about
which personal intuition or divine revelation are supposed to convey
precise information. Economics merely establishes the fact that entrepreneurial profits and losses are essential phenomena of the market
economy. There cannot be a market economy without them. It is
certainly possible for the police to confiscate all profits. But such
a policy would by necessity convert the market economy into a
senseless chaos. Man has, there is no doubt, the power to destroy many
things, and he has made in the course of history ample use of this
faculty. He could destroy the market economy too.
If those self-styled moralists were not blinded by their envy, they
would not deal with profit without dealing simultaneously with its
corollary, loss. They would not pass over in silence the fact that
the preliminary conditions of economic i~nprovementarc an achievement of those whose saving accumulates the additional capital goods
and of the inventors, and that the utilization of these conditions for
the realization of economic improvement is effected by the entrepreneurs. The rest of the people do not contribute to progress, but
they are benefited by the horn of plenty which other people's activities
pour upon them.
What has been said about the progressing economy is wmtatis
mutandis to be applied to the conditions of a retrogressing economy,
i.e., an economy in which the per capita quota of capital invested is
decreasing. In such an economy there is an excess in the total sum of
entrepreneurial losses over that of profits. People who cannot free
themselves from the fallacy of thinking in concepts of collectives
and whole groups might raise the question of how in such a retrogressing economy there could be any entrepreneurial activity at all.
W h y should anybody embark upon an enterprise if he ltnows in
advance that mathematically his chance of earning profits arc smaller
than those of suffering losses? However, this mode of posing the
~ r n h l e mis fallacious. Like other people? entrepreneurs do not act as
members of a class, bur as individuals. N o entrepreneur bothers a whit
about the fate of the totality of the entrepreneurs. It is irrelevant to
the individual entrepreneur what happens to other people whom
theories, according to a certain characteristic, assign to the same class
they assign hi~n.In the living, perpetually changing market society
there are always profits to be earned by efficient entrepreneurs. The
fact that in a retrogressing economy the total amount of losses exceeds
the total amount of profits does not deter a man who has confidence
in his own superior efficiency. A prospective entrepreneur does not
consult the calculus of probability which is of no avail in the field of

The Market

297

understanding. H e trusts his own ability to understand future market
conditions better than his less gifted fellow men.
The entrepreneurial function, the striving of entrepreneurs after
profits, is the driving power in the market economy. Profit and loss
are the devices by means of which the consumers exercise their
supremacy on the market. T h e behavior of the consumers makes
profits and losses appear and thereby shifts ownership of the means
of production from the hands of the less efficient into those of the
more efficient. I t makes a man the more influential in the direction of
business activities the better he succeeds in serving the consumers. In
the absence of profit: and loss the entrepreneurs would not know
what the most urgent needs of the consumers are. If some entrepreneurs were to guess it, they would lack the means to adjust production accordingly.
Profit-seeking business is subject to the sovereignty of the consumers, while nonprofit institutions are sovereign unto themselves
and not responsible to the public. Production for profit is necessarily
production for use, as profits can only be earned by providing the
consumers with those things they most urgently want to use.
The moralists' and sermonizers' critique of profits misses the point.
I t is not the fault of the entrepreneurs that the consumers-the people,
the common man-prefer liquor to Bibles and detective stories to
serious books, and that governments prefer guns to butter. T h e entrepreneur does not make greater profits in selling "bad" things than
in selling "good" things. His profits are the greater the better he
succeeds in providing the consumers with those things they ask for
most intensely. People do not drink intoxicating beverages in order
to make the "alcohol capital" happy, and thcy do not go to war in
order to increase the profits of the "merchants of death." T h e existence of the armaments industries is a consequence of the warlike
spirit, not its cause.
It is not the business of the entrepreneurs to make people substitute
sound ideologies for unsound. It rests with the philosophers to change
people's ideas and ideals. T h e entrepreneur serves the consumers as
thcy are today, however wicked and ignorant.
We may admire those who abstain from making gains they co~lld
reap in producing deadly weapons or hard liquor. However, their
laudable conduct is a mere gesture without any practical effects. Even
if all entrepreneurs and capitalists were to follow their example, wars
and dipsomania would not disappear. As was the case in the precapitalistic ages, governments would produce the weapons in their
own arsenals and drinkers would distill their own liquor.

Human Action
Sonze Observations on the Underconsumption
Bogey and on the Purchclsing Power Argument
In speaking of underconsumption, people mean to describe a state of
affairs in which a part of the goods produced cannot be consumed because
the people who could consume them arc by their poverty prevented from
buying them. These goods remain unsold or can be swapped only at prices
not covering the cost of production. Hence various disarrangements and
disturbances arise, the total complex of which is called economic depression.
Now it happens again and again that entrepreneurs err in anticipating the
future state of the market. Instead of producing those goods for which the
demand of the consumers is most intense, they produce less urgently
needed goods or things which cannot be sold at all. These inefficient entrepreneurs suffer losses while their more efficient competitors who anticipated the wishes of the consumers earn profits. The losses of the former
group of entrepreneurs are not caused by a general abstention from buying
in the part of the public; they arc due to the fact that the public prefers to
buy other goods.
If it were true, as the underconsumption myth implies, that the workers
are too poor to buy the products because the entrepreneurs and the capitalists unfairly appropriate to themselves what by rights should go to the
wage earners, the state of affairs would not be altered. The "exploiters"
are not supposed to exploit from sheer wantonness. They want, it is insinuated, to increase at the expense of the "exploited" either their own
consumption or their own investments. They do not wichdraw their booty
from the universe. They spend it either in buying luxuries for their own
household or in buying producers' goods for the expansion of their enterprises. Of course, their demand is directed toward goods other than those
the wage earners would have bought if the profits had been confiscated and
distributed among them. Entrepreneurial errors with regard to the state of
the market of various classes of commodities as created by such "exploitation" are in no way different from any other entrepreneurial shortcomings.
Entrepreneurial errors result in losses for the inefficient entrepreneurs
which are counterbalanced by the profits of the efficient entrepreneurs.
They make business bad for some groups of industries and good for other
groups. They do not bring about a general depression of trade.
The underconsumption myth is baseless self-contradictory balderdash.
Its reasoning crumbles away as soon as one begins to examine it. It is untenable even if one, for the sake of argument, accepts thc "exploitation"
doctrine as correct.
The purchasing power argument runs in a slightly different manner.
It contends that a rise in wage rates is a prerequisite of the expansion of
production. If wage rates do not rise, there is no use for business to increase
the quantity and to improve the quality of the goods produced. For the

The Market
additional products would find no buyers or only such buyers as restrict
their purchases of other goods. What is needed first for the realization of
economic progress is to make wage rates rise continually. Government or
labor union pressure and compulsion aiming at the enforcement of higher
wage rates are the main vehicles of progress.
As has been demonstrated above the emergence of an excess in the total
sum of entrepreneurial profits over the total sum of entrepreneurial losses
is inseparably hound up with the fact that a portion of the benefits derived
from the increase in the quantity of capital goods available and from
the improvement of technological procedures goes to the nonentrepreneurial groups. The rise in the prices of complementary factors of production,
first among them wage rates, is neither a concession which the entrepreneurs willy-nilly must make to the rest of the people nor a clever device of
the entrepreneurs in order to make profits. It is an unavoidable and necessary phenomenon in the chain of successive events which the endeavors of
the entrepreneurs to make profits by adjusting the supply of the consumers'
goods to the new state of affairs are bound to bring about. The same process
which results in an excess of entrepreneurial profits over losses causes first
-i.e., before such an excess appears-the emergence of a tendency toward
a rise in wage rates and in the prices of many material factors of production.
And it is again the same process that would in the further course of events
make this excess of profits over losses disappear, provided that no further
changes, increasing the amount of capital goods available, were to occur.
The cxcess of profits over losses is not a consequence of the rise in the prices
of the factors of production. T h e two phenomena-the rise in the prices of
the factors of production and the excess of profits over losses-are both
steps in the process of adjustment of production to the increase in the quantity of capital goods and to the technological changes which the entrepreneurial actions actuate. Only to the extent that the other strata of the population are enriched by this adjustment can an excess of profits over losses
temporarily come into being.
T h e basic error of the purchasing power argument consists in misconstruing this causal relation. It turns things upside down when considering
the rise in wage rates as the force bringing about economic improvement.
W e will discuss at a later stage of this book the consequences of the attempts of the governments and of organized labor violence to enforce wage
rates higher than those determined by a nonharnpered market.?l Here we
must only add one more explanatory remark.
When speaking of profits and losses, priccs and wage rates, what we
have in mind is always real profits and losses, real prices and real wage
rates. It is the arbitrary interchange of money terms and real terms that
has led many people astray. This problem too will be dealt with exhaustively in later chapters. Let us incidentally only mention the fact that a
rise in real wage rates is compatible with a drop in nominal wage rates.
21.

Cf. below, pp. 763-773.

Human Action

300
I o.

Promoters, Managers, Technicians, and Bureaucrats

T h e entrepreneur hires the technicians, i.e., people who have the
ability and the skill to perform definite kinds and quantities of work.
The class of technicians includes the great inventors, the champions
in the field of applied science, the constructors and designers as we11
as the performers of the most simple tasks. T h e entrepreneur joins
their ranks as far as he himself takes part in the technical execution of
his entrepreneurial plans. T h e technician contributes his own toil
and trouble; but it is the entrepreneur qua entrepreneur who directs
his labor toward definite goals. And the entrepreneur himself acts as a
mandatary, as it were, of the consumers.
T h e entrepreneurs are not omnipresent. T h e y cannot themselves
attend to the manifold tasks which are incumbent upon them. Adjustment of production to the best possible supplying of the consumers
with the goods they are asking for most urgently does not merely
consist in determining the general plan for the utilization of resources.
There is, of course, no doubt that this is the main function of the
promoter and speculator. But besides the great adjustments, many
small adjustments are necessary too. Each of them may seem trifling
and of little bearing upon the total result. But the cumulative effect
of shortcomings in many of these minor matters can be such as to
frustrate entirely the success of a correct solution of the great problems. A t any rate, it is certain that every failure to handle the smaller
problems results in a squandering of scarce factors of production and
consequently in impairing the best possible satisfaction of the consumers.
It is important to conceive in what respects the problem we have
in mind differs from the technological tasks of the technicians. T h e
execution of every project upon which the entrepreneur has embarked in making his decision ~ 4 1 1regard to the general plan of
action requires a multiplicity of minute decisions. Each of these decisions must be efiected in such a way as to prefer that soiution of
the problem which-without
interfering with the designs of the
general plan for the whole project-is the most economical one. It
must avoid superfluous costs in the same way as does the general plan.
T h e technician from his purely technological point of view either
may not see any difference in the alternatives offered b y various
meihods for thesolution of such a detail or may give preference t o
one of these methods on account of its greater output in phvsical
quantities. But the entrepreneur is actuated by the profit motive: This
enjoins upon him the urge t o prefer the most economical solution, i.e.,

The Market

301

that solution which avoids employing factors of production whose
employment would impair the satisfaction of the more intensely felt
wants of the consumcrs. H e will prefer among the various methods
with regard to which the technicians are neutral, the one the application of which requires the smaIlest cost. H e may reject the technicians' suggestion to choose a more costly method securing a greater
physical output if his calculation shows that the increase in output
would not outweigh the increase in cost required. N o t only in the
great decisions and plans but no less in the daily decisions of small
problems as they turn up in the current conduct of affairs, the entrepreneur must perform his task of adjusting production to the demand
of the consumers as reflected in the prices of the market.
Economic calculation as practiced in the market economy, and
especialIy the system of double-entry bookkeeping, make it possible
to reIieve the entrepreneur of involvement in too much detail. H e
can devote himself to his great tasks without being entangled in a
multitude of trifles beyond any mortal man's range of sight. He can
appoint assistants to whose solicitude he entrusts the care of subordinate entrepreneurial duties. And these assistants in their turn can be
aided according to the same principle by assistants appointed for a
smaller sphere of duties. In this way a whole managerial hierarchy
can be built up.
A manager is a junior partner of thc entrepreneur, as it were, no
matter what the contractual and financial terms of his employment
are. T h e only relevant thing is that his own financial interests force
him to attend to the best of his abilities to the entrepreneurial functions which are assigned to him within a limited and precisely determined sphere of action.
It is the system of double-entv bookkeeping that makes the
functioning of the managerial syste& possible. Thanks to it the entreprencur is in a position to separate the calculation of each part of his
total enterprise in such a way that he can determine the role it plays
within his whole enterprise. Thus he can look at each section as if it
were a separatc entity and can appraise it according to the share it
contributes to the success of the total enterprisc. Within this system
of business calculation each section of a firm represents an integral
entity, a hypothetical independent business, as it were. It is assumed
that this section "owns" a definite part of the whole capital employed
in the enterprise, that it buys from other sections and sells to them,
that it has its own expenses and its own revenues, that its dealings result either in a profit or in a loss which is imputed to its own conduct
of affairs as distinguished from the result of the other sections. Thus

302
Human Action
the entrepreneur can assign to each section's management a great deal
of indepcndence. The only directive he gives to a man whom he entrusts with the managerncnt of a circumscribed job is to make as
much profit as possible. An examination of the accounts shows how
successful or unsuccessful the managers were in exccuting this directive. Every tnanagcr and submanager is responsible for the working
of his section or subsection. It is to his credit if the accounts show
a profit, and it is to his disadvantage if they show a loss. His own interests impel him toward the utmost care and exertion in the conduct of his section's affairs. If he incurs losses, he will be replaced by
a man whom the entrepreneur expects to be more successful, or the
whole section will be discontinued. At any rate, the manager will
lose his job. If he succeeds in making profits, his income will be increased, or at least he will not be in danger of losing it. Whether or
not a manager is entitled to a share in the profit imputed to his section
is not important with regard to the personal intcrest he takes in the
results of his section's dealings. His welfare is at any rate closely connected with that of his section. His task is not like that of the technician, to perform a definite piece of work according to a definite precept. It is to adjust-within the limited scope left to his discretionthe opcration of his section to the state of the market. Of course, just
as an entrepreneur may combine in his person entrepreneurial functions and those of a technician, such a union of various functions can
also occur with a manager.
The managerial function is aIways subservient to the entrepreneurial function. It can relieve the entrepreneur of a part of his minor
duties; it can never evolve into a substitute for entrepreneurship.
The fallacy to the contrary is due to the error confusing the category
of entrepreneurship as it is defined in the imaginary construction of
functional distribution with conditions in a living and operating market economy. The function of the entrepreneur cannot be separated
from the direction of the employment of factors of production for
the accomplishment of definite tasks. The entrcpreneur controIs the
factors of production; it is this control that brings him either entrepreneurial profit or loss.
It is possible to reward the manager by paying for his services in
proportion to the contribution of his section to the profit earned by
the entrepreneur. But this is of no avail. As has been pointed out, the
managcr is under any circumstances interested in the success of that
part of the business which is entrusted to his care. But the manager
cannot be made answerable for the losses incurred. These losses are

The Market

303

suffered by the owners of the capital employed. They cannot be
shifted to the manager.
Society can freely leave the care for the best possible employment
of capital goods to their owners. In embarking upon definite projects
these owners expose their own property, wealth, and social position.
They are even more interested in the success of their entrepreneurial
activities than is society as a whole. For society as a whole the squandering of capital invested in a definite project means only the loss of
a small part of its total funds; for the owner it means much more, for
the most part the loss of his total fortune. But if a manager is given
a completely free band, things are different. H e speculates in risking
other people's money. He sees the prospects of an uncertain enterprise from another angle than that of the man who is answerable for
the losses. It is precisely when he is rewarded by a share of the profits
that he becomes foolhardy because he does not share in the losses too.
The illusion that management is the totality of entrepreneurial
activities and that management is a perfect substitute for entrepreneurship is the outgrowth of a misinterpretation of the conditions of
the corporations, the typical form of present-day business. It is asserted that the corporation is operated by the salaried managers, while
the shareholders are merely passive spectators. All the powers are
concentrated in the hands of hired employees. The shareholders are
idle and useless; they harvest what the managers have sown.
This doctrine disregards entireIy the role that the capital and
money market, the stock and bond exchange, which a pertinent
idiom simply calls the "market," plays in the direction of corporate
business. The dealings of this market are branded by popular anticapitalistic bias as a hazardous game, as mere gambling. In fact, the
changes in the prices of common and preferred stock and of corporate
bonds are the means applied by the capitalists for the supreme control
of the flow of capital. The price structure as determined by the
speculations on the capital and money markets and on the big com~nodityexchanges not only decides how much capital is available for
the conduct of each corporation's business; it creates a state of affairs
to which the managers must adjust their operations in detail.
The general direction of a corporation's conduct of business is
exercised by the stockholders and their elected mandataries, the
directors. The directors appoint and discharge the managers. In
smaller companies and sometimes even in bigger ones the offices of the
directors and the managers are often combined in the same persons.
A successful corporation is ultimately never controlled by hired

304

Human Action

managers. Thc emergence of an omnipotent managerial class is not
a phenomenon of the unhampered market economy. It was, on the
contrary, an outgrowth of the interventionist policies consciously
aiming at an elimination of the influence of the shareholders and at
thcir virtual expropriation. In Germany, Italy, and Austria it was a
preliminary step on the way toward the substitution of government
control of business for free enterprise, as has been the case in Great
Britain with regard to the Bank of England and the railroads. Similar
tendencies are prevalent in the American public utilities. The marvelous achievements of corporate business were not a result of the activitics of a salaried managcrjal oligarchy; they were accomplished by
people who were connected with the corporation by means of the
ownership of a considerable part or of the greater part of its stock and
whom part of the public scorned as promoters and profiteers.
The entreprcneur determincs alone, without any managerial interference, in what lines of business to employ capital and how much
capital to employ. H e determines the expansion and contraction of
the size of the total business and its main sections. H e determines the
enterprise's financial structure. These are the essential decisions which
are instrumental in the conduct of business. They always fall upon
the entreprcneur, in corporations as well as in other types of a firm's
legal structure. Any assistance given to the entrepreneur in this regard is of ancillary character only; he takes information about the
past state of affairs from experts in the fields of law, statistics, and
technology; but the finaI decision implying a judgment about the
future state of the market rests with him alone. The execution of the
details of his projects may then be entrusted to managers.
The social functions of the managerial elite are no less indispensable
for the operation of the market economy than are the functions of the
elite of inventors, technologists, engineers, designers, scientists, and
experimcnters. In the ranks of the managers many of the most eminent
mcn serve the cause of economic progress. Successful managers are
remunerated by high salaries and often by a share in the enterprise's
gross profits. Many of them in the couise of their careers become
themselves capitalists and entrepreneurs. Nonetheless, the managerial
function is different from the entrepreneurial function.
It is a serious mistake to identify entrepreneurship with management as in the popular antithesis of "management" and "labor." This
confusion is, of course, intentional. It is designed to obscure the fact
that the functions of entrcpreneurship are entirely different from
those of the managers attending to the minor details of the conduct
of business. The structure of business, the allocation of capital to the

The Market
various branches of production and firms, the size and the line of
operation of each plant and shop are considered as given facts and it
is implied that no further changes will be effected with regard to
them. T h e onIy task is to go on in the oid routine. In such a stationary
world, of course, there is no need for innovators and promoters; the
total amount of profits is counterbalanced by the total amount of
losses. T o explode the fallacies of this doctrine it is enough to compare
the structure of American business in I 945 with that of 1915.
But even in a stationary world it would be nonsensical to give
"labor," as a popular slogan demands, a share in management. The
realization of such a postulate would result in s y n d i ~ a l i s m . ~ ~
There is furthermore a readiness to confuse the manager with a
bureaucrat.
Burcnucratic management, as distinguished from p o f i t management, is the method applied in the conduct of administrative affairs,
the result of which has no cash value on the market. T h e successful
performance of the duties entrusted to the care of a police department is of the greatest importance for the preservation of social cooperation and benefits each member of society. But it has no price on
the market, it cannot be bought or sold; it can therefore not be confronted with the expenses incurred in the endeavors to secure it. I t
results in gains, but these gains are not reflected in profits liable to
expression in terms of money. T h e methods of economic calculation,
and especially those of double-entry bookkeeping, are not applicable
to them. ~ u & e s sor failure of a
department's activities cannot
be ascertained according to the arithmetical procedures of profitseeking business. N o accountant can establish whether or not a police
department or one of its subdivisions has succeeded.
T h e amount of money to he expended in every branch of profitseeking business is determined by the behavior of the consumers. Tf
the automobile industry were to treble the capital employed, it
would certainly improve the services it renders to the public.'There
would be more cars available. But this expansion of the industry would
withhold capital from other branches of production in which it
could fill more urgent wants of the consumers. This fact would render
the expansion of the automobile industry unprofitable and increase
profits in other branches of business. In their endeavors to strive after
the highest profit obtainable, entrepreneurs are forced to allocate to
each branch of business only as much capital as can be employed in it
without impairing the satisfaction of more urgent wants of the consumers. Thus the entrepreneurial activities are automatically, as it
22.

Cf. below, pp. 808-816.

306
Human Action
were, directed by the consumers' wishes as they are reflected in the
price structure of consumers' goods.
N o such limitation is enjoined upon the allocation of funds for the
performance of the tasks incumbent upon government activities.
There is no doubt that the services rendered by the police department of the City of S e w York could be considerably improved by
trebling the budgetary allocation. But the question is whether or not
this improvement would be considerable enough to justify either the
restriction of the services rendered by other departments-e.g., those
of the department of sanitation-or the restriction of the private consumption of the taxpayers. This question cannot be answered by the
accounts of the police department. These accounts provide information only about the expenses incurred. They cannot provide any information about the results obtained, as these results cannot be expressed in money equivalents. The citizens must directly determine
the amount of services they want to get and are ready to pay for. They
discharge this task by electing councilmen and officeholders who are
prepared to comply with their intentions.
Thus the mayor and the chiefs of the city's various departments are
restricted by the budget. They are not free to act upon what they
themselves consider the most beneficial solution of the various problems the citizenry has to face. They are bound to spend the funds
allocated for the purposes the budget has assigned them. They must
not use them for other tasks. Auditing in the field of public administration is entirely different from that in the field of profit-seeking
business. Its goal is to establish whether or not the funds allocated
have been expended in strict compliance with the provisions of the
budget.
In profit-seeking business the discretion of the managers and submanagers is restricted by considerations of profit and loss. The profit
motive is the only directive needed to make them subservient to the
wishes of the consumers. There is no need to restrict their discretion
by mi~ute
instructinns and mks. If thev arc efiicient, such zedd!in-5
with details would at best be superfluous, if not pernicious in tving
their hands. If they are inefficient, it would not render their actiiities
more successful. It would only provide them with a lame excuse that
the failure was caused by inappropriate rules. The only instruction
required is self-understood and does not need to be especiallv mentioned: Seek profit.
Things are different in public administration, in the conduct of
government affairs. In this field the discretion of the officeholders
and their subaltern aids is not restricted by considerations of profit

The Market
and loss. If their supreme boss-no matter whether he is the sovereign
people or a sovereign despot-were to leave them a free hand, he
would renounce his own supremacy in their favor. These officers
would become irresponsible agents, and their power would supersede
that of the ~ e o p l eor the despot. They would do what pleased them,
not what their bosses wanted them to do. T o prevent thisoutcome and
to make them subservient to the will of their bosses it is necessary
to give them detailed instructions regulating their conduct of affairs
in every respect. Then it becomes their duty to handle all affairs in
strict compliance with these ruIes and regulations. Their freedom to
adjust their acts to what seems to them the most appropriate solution
of a concrete problem is limited by these norms. They are bureaucrats,
i.e., men who in every instance must observe a set of inflexible regulations.
Bureaucratic conduct of affairs is conduct bound to comply with
detailed rules and regulations fixed by the authority of a superior
body. It is the only alternative to profit management. Profit management is inapplicable in the pursuit of affairs whicli have no cash value
on the market and in the non-profit conduct of affairs which could
also be operated on a profit basis. The former is the case of the adn~inistrationof the social apparatus of coercion and compulsion; the
latter is the case in the conduct of an institution on a non-profit basis,
e.g., a school, a hospital, or a postal system. Whenever the operation
of a system is not directed by the profit motive, it must be directed
by bureaucratic rules.
Bureaucratic conduct of affairs is, as such, not an eviI. It is the only
appropriate method of handling governmental affairs, i.e., the social
apparatus of compulsion and coercion. As government is necessary,
bureaucratism is-in this field-no less necessary. Where economic
calculation is unfeasible, bureaucratic methods are indispensable. A
socialist government must apply them to all affairs.
No business, whatever its size or specific task, can ever become
bureaucratic so long as it is entirely and solely operated on a profit
basis. But as soon as it abandons profit-seeking and substitutes for it
what is called the service principle-ie., the rendering of services
without regard as to whether or not the prices to be obtained for then1
cover the expenses-it must adopt bureaucratic methods for those of
entrepreneurial manage men^^^
23. For a detailed treatment of the problems involved, c f . Mises, Bureaircracy
(New Haven, I 944).

Human Action

308
I I.

The Selective Process

The selective process of the market is actuated by the composite
effort of all members of the market economy. Driven by the urge
to remove his own uneasiness as much as possible, each individual is
intent, on the one hand, upon attaining that position in which he can
contribute most to the best satisfaction of everyone else and, on the
other hand, upon taking best advantage of the services offered by
everyone else. This means that he tries to sell on the dearest market
and to buy on the cheapest market. The resultant of these endeavors
is not only the price structure but no less the social structure, the
assignment of definite tasks to the various individuals. The market
makes people rich or poor, determines who shall run the big plants
and who shall scrub the floors, fixes how many peopIe shall work
in the copper mines and how many in the symphony orchestras. None
of these dccisions is made once and for all; they are revocable every
day. T h e selective process never stops. It goes on adjusting the social
apparatus of production to the changes in demand and supply. It
reviews again and again its previous decisions and forces everybody
to submit to a new examination of his case. There is no security and
no such thing as a right to preserve any position acquired in the past.
Nobody is exempt from the law of the market, the consumers' sovereignty.
Ownership of the means of production is not a privilege, but a
social liability. Capitalists and landowners are compelled to employ
their property for the best possible sarjsfaction of the consumers.
If they are slow and inept in the performance of their duties, they
are penalized by losses. If they do not learn the lesson and do not reform their conduct of affairs, they lose their wealth. No investment
is safe forever. He who does not use his property in serving the consumers in the most efficient way is doomed to failure. There is no
room left for people who would like to enjoy their fortunes in idleness and thoughtIessness. The proprietor must aim to invest his funds
in such a way that principal and yield are at least not impaired.
In the ages of caste privileges and trade barriers there were revenues
not dependent on the market. Princes and lords lived at the expense
of the humble slaves and serfs who owed them tithes, statute labor,
and tributes. Ownership of land could only be acquired either by
conquest or by largesse on the part of a conqueror. It could be forfeited only by recantation on the part of the donor or by conquest on
the part of another conqueror. Even later, when the lords and their
liegemen began to sell their surpluses on the market, they could not

The Market

309

be ousted by the competition of more efficient people. Competition
was free only within very narrow limits. The acquisition of manorial
estates was reserved to the nobility, that of urban real property to the
citizens of the township, that of farm land to the peasants. Competition in the arts and crafts was restricted by the guilds. The consumers
were not in a position to satisfy their wants in the cheapest way, as
price control made underbidding impossible to the sellers. The buyers
were at the mercy of their purveyors. If the privileged producers refused to resort to the employment of the most adequate raw materials
and of the most efficient methods of processing, the consumers were
forced to endure the consequences of such stubbornness and conservatism.
The landowner who lives in perfect self-sufficiency from the fruits
of his own farming is independent of the market. But the modern
farmer who buys equipment, fertilizers, seed, labor, and other factors
of production and sells agricultural products is subject to the law of
the marltet. His income depends on the consumers and he must adjust his operations to their wishes.
The selective function of the market works also with regard to
labor. T h e worker is attracted by that kind of work in which he can
expect to earn most. As is the case with material factors of production, the factor labor too is allocated to those employments in which
it best serves the consumers. There prevails the tendency not to waste
any quantity of labor for the satisfaction of less urgent demand if
more urgent demand is still unsatisfied. Like a11 other strata of society,
the worker is subject to the supremacy of the consumers. If he disobeys, he is penalized by a cut in income.
The selection of the market does not establish social orders, castes,
or classes in the Marxian sense. Nor do the entrepreneurs and promoters form an integrated social class. Each individual is free to become a promoter if he relies upon his own ability to anticipate future
marltet conditions better than his fellow citizens and if his attempts
to act at his own peril and on his own responsibility are approved by
the consumers. One enters the ranks of the promoters by aggressively
pushing forward and thus submitting to the trial to which the market
subjects, without respect for persons, everybody who wants to become a promoter or to remain in this eminent position. Everybody
has the opportunity to take his chance. A newcomer does not need
to wait for an invitation or encouragement from anyone. He must
leap forward on his own account and must himself know how to
provide the means needed.
It has been contended again and again that under the conditions

310
Human Action
of "late" or "mature" capitalism it is no longer possible for penniless
people to climb the ladder to wealth and entrcpreneurial position.
No attempt has ever been made to prove this thesis. Since it was first
advanced, the composition of the entrepreneurial and capitalist groups
has changed considerably. A great part of the former entrepreneurs
and their heirs have been eliminated and other people, newcomers,
have taken their places. It is, of course, true that in the last years institutions have been purposely developed which, if not abolished very
soon, will make the functioning of the market in every regard impossible.
The point of view from which the consumers choose the captains
of industry and business is exclusively their qualification to adjust
production to the needs of the consumers. They do not bother about
other features and merits. They want a shoe manufacturer to fabricate good and cheap shoes. They are not intent upon entrusting the
conduct of the shoe trade to handsome amiable boys, to people of
good drawing-room manners, of artistic gifts, of scholarly habits, or
of any other virtues or talents. A proficient businessman may often
be deficient in many accomplishments which contribute to the success
of a man in other spheres of life.
It is quite common nowadays to deprecate the capitalists and entrepreneurs. A man is prone to sneer at those who are more prosperous
than himself. These people, he contends, are richer only because they
are less scrupulous than he. If he were not restrained by due consideration for the laws of morality and decency, he would be no less
successful than they are. Thus men glory in the aureole of selfcomplacency and Pharisaic self-righteousness.
Now it is true that under the conditions brought about by interventionism many people can acquire wealth by graft and bribery. In
many countries interventionism has so undermined the supremacy
of the nlarltet that it is more advantageous for a businessman to rely
upon the aid of those in political office than upon the best satisfaction
of the needs of the consumers. But it is not this that the popuiar critics
of other people's wealth have in mind. They contend that the methods
by which wealth is acquired in a pure market society are objectionable from the ethical point of view.
Against such statements it is necessary to emphasize that, so far
as the operation of the market is not sabotaged by the interference of
governments and other factors of coercion, success in business is the
proof of services rendered to the consumers. The poor man need not
be inferior to the prosperous businessman in other regards; he may
sometimes be outstanding in scientific, literary, and artistic achieve-

?'he Market

311

ments or in civic Ieadership. But in the social system of production
he is inferior. T h e creative genius may be right in his disdain for
commercial success; it may be true that he would have been prosperous in business if he had not preferred other things. But the clerks
and workers who boast of their moral superiority deceive themsehes
and find consolation in this self-deception. They do not admit that
they have been tried and found wanting by their fellow citizens, the
consumers.
It is often asserted that the poor man's failure in the competition
of the market is caused by his lack of education. Equality of opportunity, it is said, could be provided only by making education at every
level accessible to all. There prevails today the tendency to reduce
all differences among various peoples to their education and to deny
the existence of inborn inequalities in intellect, will power, and character. It is not generally realized that education can never be more
than indoctrination with theories and ideas already developed. Education, whatever benefits it may confer, is transmission of traditional
doctrines and valuations; it is by necessity conservative. It produces
imitation and routine, not improvement and progress. Innovators
and creative geniuses cannot be reared in schools. They are precisely
the men who defy what the school has taught them.
In order to succeed in business a man does not need a degree from
a school of business administration. These schools train the subalterns
for routine jobs. They certainly do not train entrepreneurs. An entrepreneur cannot be trained. A man becomes an entrepreneur in seizing
an opportunity and filIing the gap. N o special education is required
for such a display of keen judgment, foresight, and energy. The most
successful businessmen were often uneducated when measured by the
scholastic standards of the teaching profession. But they were
to their social function of adjusting production to the most urgent
demand. Because of these merits the consumers chose them for
business Ieadership.
I 2.

T h e IndividuaI and the Market

I t is customary to speak metaphorically of the automatic and anonymous forces actuating the "mechanism" of the market. In employing such metaphors people are ready to disregard the fact that the
only factors directing the market and the determination of prices
are purposive acts of men. There is no automatism; there are only
men consciously and deliberately aiming at ends chosen. There are
no mysterious mechanical forces; there is only the human will to re-

312

Human Action

move uneasiness. There is no anonymity; there is I and you and Bill
and Joe and all the rest. And each of us is both a producer and a consumer.
The market is a social body; it is the foremost social body. The
market phenomena are social phenomena. They are the resultant of
each individual's active contribution. But they are different from
each such contribution. They appear to the individual as something
given which he himsdf cannot alter. H e does not always see that he
himself is a part, although a small part, of the complex of elements
determining each momentary state of the market. Because he fails
to realize this fact he feels himself free, in criticizing the market
phenomena, to condemn with regard to his fellow men a mode of
conduct which he considers as quite right with regard to himself.
He blames the market for its callousness and disregard of persons
and asks for social control of the market in order to "humanize" it.
He asks on the one hand for measures to protect the consumer against
the producers. But on the other hand he insists even more passionately
upon the necessity of protecting himself as a producer against the
consumers. T h e outcome of these contradictory demands is the
modern methods of government interference whose most outstanding examples were the Sozialpolitik of imperial Germany and the
American New Deal.
It is an old fallacy that it is a legitimate task of civiI government to
protect the less efficient producer against the competition of the
more efficient. One asks for a "producers' policy" as distinct from
a "consumers' policy." While flamboyantly repeating the truism that
the only aim of production is to provide ample supplies for consumption, people emphasize with no less eloquence that the "industrious" producer should be protected against the "idle" consumer.
However, producers and consumers are identical. Production and
consumption are different stages in acting. Catallactics embodies these
differences in speaking of producers and consumers. But in reality
they are the same people. It is, of course, possible to protect a less
efficient producer against the con~petitionof more efficient fellows.
Such a privilege conveys to the privileged the benefits which the
unhampered market provides only to those who succeed in best
filling the wants of the consumers. But it necessarily impairs the
satisfaction of the consumers. If only one producer or a small group
is privileged, the beneficiaries enjoy an advantage at the expense of
the rest of the people. But if all producers are privileged to the same
extent, everybody loses in his capacity as consumer as much as he
gains in his capacity as a producer. moreo over, all are injured because

The Market

313

the supply of products drops if the most efficient men are prevented
from empioying their skill in that field in which they could render
the best services to the consumers.
If a consumer believes that it is expedient or right to pay a higher
price for domestic cereals than for cereals imported from abroad, or
for manufactures ~rocessedin plants operated by small business or
emploving unionized workers than for those of another provenance,
he is free t o do so. H e would only have to satisfy himself that the
commodity offered for sale meets the conditions upon which he
makes the allowance of a higher price depend. Laws which forbid
counterfeiting of labels of origin and trade-marks would succeed
in attaining the ends aimed at b y tariffs, labor legislation, and privileges granted to small business, But it is beyond doubt that the consumers are not prepared to act in this way. The fact that a commodity
is marked as imported does not impair its salabiIity if it is better or
cheaper, or both. As a rule the buyers want to buy as cheaply as possible without regard for the origin of the article or some particular
characteristics of the producers.
T h e psychological root of the producers' policy as practiced today in alleparts of the world is to be seen in spurious economic doctrines. These doctrines flatly deny that the privileges granted to less
efficient producers burden the consumer. Their advocates contend
that such measures are prejudicial only to those against whom they
discriminate. When, pressed further, they are forced to admit that
the consumers are damaged too, they maintain that the losses of the
consumers are more than compensated by an increase in their money
income which the measures in question are bound to bring about.
Thus in the predominantly industrial countries of Europe the
protectionists were first eager t o declare that the tariff on agricultural
products hurts exclusively the interests of the farmers of the predominantly agricultural countries and of the grain dealers. It is certain that
these'exporting interests are damaged too. But it is no less certain
that the consumers of the country that adopts the tariff policy are
losing with them. They must pay higher prices for their food. Of
course, the protectionist retorts, that this is not a burden. For, he
argues, the additional amount that the domestic consumer pays increases the farmers' income and their purchasing power; they will
spend the whole surplus in buying more of the products manufactured
b y the nonagricultural strata of the population. This paralogism can
easily be exploded by referring to the well-known anecdote of the
man who asks an innkeeper for a gift of ten dollars; it will not cost
hiin anything because the beggar promises to spend the whole amount

314
Human Action
in his inn. But for all that, the protectionist fallacy got hold of
public opinion, and this alone explains the popularity of the measures
inspired by it. Many people simply do not realize that the only effect
of protection is to divert production from those places in which it
could produce more per unit of capital and labor expendcd to places
in which it produces less. It makes people poorer, not more prosperous.
The ultimate foundation of modern protectionism and of the striving for economic autarky of each country is to be found in this
mistaken belief that they are the best means to make every citizen,
or at least the immense majority of them, richer. The term riches
means in this connection an increase in the individual's real income
and an improvement in his standard of living. It is true that the
policy of national economic insulation is a necessary corollary of the
endeavors to interfere with domestic business, and that it is an outcome of warlike tendencies as well as one of the factors producing
these tendencies. But the fact remains that it would never have been
possible to sell the idea of protection to the voters if one had not been
able to convince them that protection not only does not impair their
standard of living but raises it considerably.
It is important to emphasize this fact because it utterly explodes
a myth propagated by many popular books. According to these
myths, contemporary man is no longer motivated by the desire to
improve his material well-being and to raise his standard of Iiving.
The assertions of the economists to the contrary are mistaken. Modern
man givcs priority to "noneconomic" or "irrational" things and is
ready to forego material betterment whenever its attainment stands
in the way of those "ideal" concerns. It is a serious blunder, common
mostly with economists and businessmen, to interpret the events of
our time from an "economic" point of view and to criticize current
ideologies with regard to the alleged economic fallacies implied.
People long for other things more than for a good life.
It is hardly possible to misconstrue the history of our age more
crassly. Our contemporaries are driven by a fanatical zeal to get more
amenities and by an unrestrained appetite to enjoy life. A characteristic social phenomenon of our day is the pressure group, an alliance
of people eager to promote their own material well-being by the
employment of all means, legal or illegal, peaceful or violent. For
the pressure group nothing matters but the increase of its members'
real income. I t is not concerned with any other aspects of life. It
does not bother whether o r not the realization of its program hurts
the vital interests of other men, of their own nation or country, and
of the whole of mankind. But, of course, every pressure group is

The A4arket

315

anxious to justify its demands as beneficial to the general public welfare and to stigmatize its critics as abject scoundrels, idiots, and traitors. In the pursuit of its plans it displays a quasi-religious ardor.
Without exception all political parties promise their supporters
a higher real income. There is no difference in this respect between
nationalists and internationalists and between the supporters of a
market economy and the advocates of either socialism or interventionism. If a party asks its supporters to make sacrifices for its cause,
it always explains these sacrifices as the necessary temporary means
for the attainment of the ultimate goal, the improvement of the
material well-being of its members. Each party considers it as an
insidious plot against its prestige and its survival if somebody ventures
to question the capacity of its projects to n~akcthe group members
Inore prosperous. Each party regards with a deadly hatred the
economists embarking upon such a critique.
A11 varieties of the producers' policy are advocated on the ground
of their alleged ability to raise the parry members' standard of living.
Protectionism and economic self-suficiency, labor union pressure
and compulsion, labor legislation, minimum wage rates, public spending, credit expansion, subsidies, and other makeshifts are always recommended by their advocates as the most suitable or the only means
to increase the real income of the people for whose votes they canvass.
Every contemporary statesman or politician invariably tells his voters:
My program will make yo11 as affluent as conditions &ay permit, while
my adversaries' program will bring you want and misery.
I t is true that some secluded intellectuals in their esoteric circles
talk differently. They proclaim the priority of what they call eternaI
absolute values and feign in their declamations-not in their persona1
conduct-a disdain of things secular and transitory. But the public
ignores such utterances. T h e main goal of present-day political action
is to secure for the rcspective pressure group memberships the highest material well-bcing. The only way for a leader to succeed is to
instill in people the conviction that hiiprogram best serves the attainment of this goal.
What is wrong with the producers' policies is their faulty economics.
If one is prepared to indulge in the fashionable tendency to explain human things by resorting to the tern~inologyof psychopathology, one might be tempted to say that modern man in contrasting a
producers' policy with a consumers' policy has fallen victim to a kind
of schizophrenia. He fails to realize that he is an undivided and indivisible person, i.e., an individual, and as such no less a consumer than

Human Action

316

a producer. The unity of his consciousness is split into two parts;
his mind is inwardly divided against himself. But it matters little
whether or not we adopt this mode of describing the fact that the
economic doctrine resulting in these policies is faulty. W e are not
concerned with the pathological source from which an error may
stem, but with the error as such and with its logical roots. The unmasking of the error by means of ratiocination is the primary fact.
If a statement were not exposed as logically erroneous, psychopathology would not be in a position to qualify the state of mind from which
it stems as pathological. If a man imagines himself to be the king of
Siam, the first thing which the psychiatrist has to establish is whether
or not he really is what he believes himself to be. Only if this question is answered in the negative can the man be considered insane.
It is true that most of our contemporaries are committed to a fallacious interpretation of the producer-consumer nexus. In buying
they behave as if they were connected with the market only as buyers,
and vice versa in selling. As buyers they advocate stern measurks to
protect them against the sellers, and as sellers they advocate no less
harsh measures against the buyers. But this antisocial conduct which
shakes the very foundations of social cooperation is not an outgrowth
of a pathological state of ~nind.It is the.outcome of a narrow-mindedness which fails to conceive the operation of the market economy
and to anticipate the ultimate effects of one's own actions.
It is permissible to contend that the immense majority of our contemporaries are mentally and intellectually not adjusted to life in the
market society although they themselves and their fathers have unwittingly created this society by their actions. But this maladjustment
consists in nothing else than in the failure to recognize erroneous
doctrines as such.
I 3.

Business Propaganda

T h e consumer is not omniscient. He does not know where he can
obtain at the cheapest price what he is looking for. Very often he does
not even know what kind of commodity or service is suitable to
remove most efficaciously the particular uneasiness he wants to remove. At best he is familiar with the market conditions of the immediate past and arranges his plans on the basis of this information.
T o convey to him information about the actual state of the marker
is the task of business propaganda.
I3usincss propaganda must be obtrusive and blatant. It is its aim
to attract the attention of slow people, to rouse latent wishes, to

The Market

317

entice men to substitute innovation for inert clinging to traditional
routine. In order to succeed, advertising must be adjusted to the
mentality of the people courted. It must suit their tastes and speak
their idiom. Advertising is shrill, noisy, coarse, puffing, because the
public does not react to dignified allusions. It is the bad taste of the
public that forces the advertisers to display bad taste in their publicity
campaigns. The art of advertising has evolved into a branch of applied
psychology, a sister discipline of pedagogy.
Like all things designed to suit the taste of the masses, advertising
is repellent to people of delicate feeling. This abhorrence influences
the appraisal of business propaganda. Advertising and all other methods of business propaganda are condemned as one of the most outrageous outgrowths of unlimited competition. It should be forbidden.
T h e consumers should be instructed by impartial experts; the public
schools, the "nonpartisan" press, and cooperatives should perform
this task.
The restriction of the right of businessmen to advertise their
products would restrict the freedom of the consumers to spend their
incornc according to their own wants and desires. It would make it
impossible for them to learn as much as they can and want about the
state of the market and the conditions which they may consider as
relevant in choosing what to buy and what not t o buy. They would no
longer be in a position to decide on the basis of the opinion which
they themselves have formed about the seller's appraisal of his
products; they would be forced to act on the recommendation of
other people..~tis not unlikely that these mentors would save them
some mistakes. But the individual consumers would be under the
tutelage of guardians. If advertising is not restricted, the consumers
are by and large in the position of a jury which learns about the case
by hearing the witnesses and examining directly all other means of
evidence. If advertising is restricted, they are in the position of a jury
to whom an officer reports about the result of his own examination of
evidence.
I t is a widespread fallacy that skillful advertising can talk the consumers into buying everything that the advertiser wants them to buy.
The consumer is, according to this legend, simply defenseless against
"high-pressure" advertising. If this were true, success or failure in
business would depend on the mode of advertising only. However,
nobody believes that any kind of advertising would have succeeded
in making the candlemakers hold the field against the electric bulb,
the horsedrivers against the motorcars, the goose quill against the
steeI pen and later against the fountain pen. But whoever admits this

318

Human Action

implies that the quality of the commodity advertised is instrumental
in bringing about the success of an advertising campaign. Then there
is no reason to maintain that advertising is a method of cheating the
gullible public.
It is certainly possible for an advertiser to induce a man to try an
article which he would not have bought if he had known its qualities
beforehand. But as long as advertising is free to a11 competing firms,
the article which is better from the point of view of the consumers'
appetites will finalIy outstrip the less appropriate article, whatever
methods of advertising may be applied. The tricks and artifices of
advertising are available to the seller of the better product no less
than to the seller of the poorer product. But only the former enjoys
the advantage derivcd from the better quality of his product.
T h e efiects of advertising of commodities are determined by the
fact that as a rule the buyer is in a position to form a correct opinion
about the usefulness of an article bought. T h e housewife who has
tried a particular brand of soap or canned food learns from experience
whether it is good for her to buy and consume that product in thc
future too. Therefore advertising pays the advertiser only if the
examination of the first sample bought does not result in the consumer's refusal to buy more of it. It is agreed among businessmen that
it does not pay to advertise products other than good ones.
Entirely different are conditions in those fieIds in which experience
cannot teach us anything. The statements of religious, mctaphysical,
and political propaganda can be neither verified nor falsified by experience. With regard to the life beyond and the absolute, any experience is denied to men living in this world. In political matters
experience is always the experience of complex phenomena which is
opcn to different *interpretations; the onIy yardstick which can be
applied to political doctrines is aprioristic reasoning. Thus political
propaganda and business propaganda are essentially different things,
although they often resort to the same technical methods.
There are many evils for which contemporary technology and
therapeutics have no remedy. There are incurable diseases and there
are irreparable personal defects. It is a sad fact that some people try
to exploit their fellow men's plight by offering them patent medicines.
Such quackeries do not make old people young and ugly girls pretty.
They only raise hopes. It would not impair the operation of the market if the authorities were to prevent such advertising, the truth of
which cannot be evidenced by the methods of the experimental
natural sciences. But whoever is ready to grant to the government this
power would be inconsistent if he objected to the demand to submit

T h e Market

319

the statements of churches and sects to the same examination. Freedom is indivisible, As soon as one starts to restrict it, one enters upon
a decline on which it is difficult to stop. If one assigns to the government the task of making truth prevail in the advertising of perfumes
and tooth paste, one cannot contest it the right to look after truth
in the more important matters of religion, philosophy, and social
ideology.
The idea that business propaganda can force the consumers to submit to the will of the advertisers is spurious. Advertising can never
succeed in supplanting better or cheaper goods available and offered
for sale.
The costs incurred by advertising are, from the point of view of
the advertiser, a part of the total bill of production costs. A businessman expends money for advertising if and as far as he expects that the
increase in sales resulting will increase the total net proceeds. In this
regard thcre is no difference between the costs of advcrtising and
all other costs of production. An attempt has been made to distinguish
between production costs and sales costs. An increase in production
costs, it has been said, increases supply, while an increase in sales
costs (advertising costs included) increases demand.24This is a mistake. All costs of production are expended with the intention of increasing demand. If the manufacturer of candy employs a better
raw material, he aims at an increase in demand in the same way as he
does in making the wrappings more attractive and his stores more
inviting and in spending more for advertisements. In increasing production costs per unit of the product the idea is always to increase demand. If a businessman wants to increase supply, he must increase
the total cost of production, which often results in lowering production costs per unit.
14. T h e

"Volkswirtschaft"

The market economy as such does not respect political frontiers.
Its field is the world.
T h e term Volkmirtschaft was long applied by the German champions of government omnipotence. Only much later did the British
and the French begin to speak of the "British economy" and "l'e'conomie fran~aise"as distinct from the economies of other nations. But
neither the English nor the French language produced an equivalent
of the term Volkswirtschaft. With the modern trend toward nationa!
24. Cf. Chamberlm, T h e Theory of Monopolistic Competition (Cambridge,
Mass., r935), pp. 1 2 3 ff.

320
Human Action
planning and national autarky, the doctrine involved in this German
word became popular everywhere. Nonetheless, only the German
language is able to express in one word all the ideas implied.
T h e Volkswirtschaft is a sovereign nation's total complex of economic activities directed and controlled by the government. It is
socialism realized within the political frontiers of each nation. In
employing this term people are fully aware of the fact that real conditions differ from the state of affairs which they deem the only adequate and desirable state. But they judge everything that happens in
the market economy from the point of view of their ideal. They assume that there is an irreconcilable conflict between the interests of
the Volkswirtschaft and those of the selfish individuals eager to seek
profit. They do not hesitate to assign priority to the interests of the
Volkswirtschaft over those of the individuals. The righteous citizen
should always place the volX'swi.~tschaftliche
interests above his own
selfish interests. He should act of his own accord as if he were an
officer of the government executing its orders. Gemeinnutz geht vor
Eigennutz (the welfare of the nation takes precedence over the
selfishness of the individuals) was the fundamental principle of Nazi
economic management. But as people are too dull and too vicious to
comply with this rule, it is the task of government to enforce it. The
German princes of the seventeenth and eighteenth century, foremost
among them the HohenzolIern Electors of Brandenburg and Kings of
Prussia, were fully equal to this task. In the nineteenth century, even
in Germany the liberal ideologies imported from the West superseded
the weI1-tried and natural policies of nationalism and socialism. However, Bismarck's and his successors' Sozialpolitik and finally Nazism
restored them.
T h e interests of a Volkswirtschaft are seen as implacably opposed
not only to those of the individuals, but no less to those of the
Volkswirtschaft of any foreign nation. The most desirable state of
a Volkswirtschaft is complete economic self-sufficiency. A nation
which depends on any imports from abroad lacks economic independence; its sovereignty is only a sham. Therefore a nation which
cannot produce at home all that it needs is bound to conquer all the
territories required. T o be really sovereign and independent a nation
must have T.ebensraum, i.e., a territory so large and rich in natural
resources that it can live in autarky at a standard no lower than that
of any other nation.
Thus the idea of the Volkswirtschaft is the most radical denial of
all the principles of the market economy. It was this idea that guided,
more or less, the economic policies of all nations in the last decades.

The Market

321

It was the pursuit of this idea that brought about the terrific wars of
our century and will probably kindle still more pernicious wars in
the future.
From the early beginnings of human history the two opposite
principles of the market economy and of the Volltswirtschaft fought
each other. Government, i.e., a social apparatus of coercion and compulsion, is a necessary requisite of peaceful cooperation. T h e marlcet
economy cannot d o without a police power safeguarding its smooth
functioning by the threat or the application of violence against peacebreakers. But the indispensable administrators and thcir armed satcllites are always tempted to use their arms for the establishment of
their own totalitarian rule. For ambitious kings and generalissimos
the very existence of a sphere of individuals' lives not subject to regimentation is a challenge. Princes, governors, and generals are never
spontaneously liberal. T h e y becomc liberal only when forced to by
the citizens.
T h e problems raised by the plans of the socialists and thc interventionists will be dealt with in later parts of this book. IJere we have
only to answer the question of whether or not any of the essential
features of the Volkswirtschaft arc compatible with the rnarlcet
economy. For the champions of the idea of the Volkswirtschaft do
not consider their scheme merely as a pattern for the establishment of
a future social order. T h e y declare emphatically that even under the
system of the market economy, which, or course, in their eyes is a
debased and vicious product of policies contrary t o human nature,
the Volkswirtschaften of the various nations are integrated units
whose interests are irreconcilably opposed to those of all other nations' Volkswirtschaften. W h a t separates one Volkswirtschaft from
all the others is not, as the economists would have us believe, merely
political institutions. It is not the trade and migration barriers established b y government interference with business and the differcnces i n legislation and in the protection granted to the individuals
I."y
- -1.
Llle U U L ~and tribiiiials that triilg atuilt the disiiirictio~it c t w e e ~ i
domestic trade and foreign trade. This diversity is, on the contrary,
the necessary outcome of the very nature of things, of an inextricable
factor; it cannot be removed by any ideology and produces its effects
whether the laws and the administrators and judges are prepared to
take notice of it or not. T h e Volkswirtschaft is a nature-given reality,
while the world-embracing ecumenic society of men, the world economy (?Yeltwirtschaft), is only an imaginary phantom of a spurious
doctrine, a plan devised for the destruction of civilization.
T h e truth is that individuals in their acting, in thcir capacity as

322

Human Action

producers and consumers, as sellers and buyers, do not make any
distinction as between the domestic market and the foreign market.
They make a distinction as between local trade and trading with more
distant places as far as the costs of transportation play a role. If government interference, such as tariffs, render international transactions
more expensive, they take this fact into account in the same way in
which they pay regard to shipping costs. A tariff on caviar has no
effect other than would a rise in the cost of transportation. A rigid
prohibition of the importation of caviar produces a state of affairs
no different from that which would prevail if caviar could not stand
shipping without an essential deterioration in its quality.
There has never been in the history of the West such a thing as
regional or national autarky. There was, as we may admit, a period in
which the division of labor did not go beyond the members of a family
household. There was autarky of families and tribes which did not
practice interpersonal exchange. But as soon as interpersonal exchange
emerged, it crossed the boundaries of the political communities.
Barter between the inhabitants of regions more remote from one another, between the members of various tribes, villages, and political
communities preceded the practice of barter between neighbors.
What people wanted first to acquire by barter and trade were things
they could not produce themselves out of their own resources. Salt,
other minerals and metals the deposits of which are unequally distributed over the earth's surface, cereals which one could not grow on the
domestic soil, and artifacts which only the inhabitants of some regions
were able to manufacture, were the first objects of trade. Trade
started as foreign trade. Only later did domestic exchange develop
between neighbors. The first holes that opened the closed household
economy to interpersonal exchange were made by the products of
distant regions. No consumer cared on his own account whether the
salt and the metals he bought were of "domestic" or of "foreign"
provenance. If it had been otherwise, the governments would not
have had any reason to interfere by means of tariffs and other barriers
to foreign trade.
But even if a government succeeds in making the barriers separating
its domestic market from foreign markets insurmountable and thus
establishes perfect national autarky, it does not create a Volkswirtschaft. A market economy which is perfectly autarkic remains for
all that a market economy; it forms a closed and isolated catallactic
system. The fact that its citizens miss the advantages which they could
derive from the international division of labor is simply a datum of
their economic conditions. Only if such an isolated country goes out-

The Market

323

right socialist, does it convert its market economy into a Volkswirtschaft.
Fascinated by the propaganda of Neo-Mercantilism, people apply
idioms which are in contrast to the principIes they take as guides in
their acting and to all the characteristics of the social order in which
they are living. Long ago the British began to call plants and farms
located in Great Britain, and even those located in the Dominions,
in the East Indies, and in the colonies, "ours." But if a ~nandid not
just want to make a show of his patriotic zeal and to i~npressother
people, he was not prepared to pay a higher price for the products
of his "own" plants than for those of the "foreign" plants. Even if he
had behaved in this way, the designation of the plants located within
the poIitical boundaries of his nation as "ours" would not be adequate.
In what sense could a Londoner, before the nationalization, call coalmines Iocated in England which he did not own "our" mines and those
of the Ruhr "foreign" mines? Whether he bought "British" coal or
"German" coal, he always had to pay the full market price. It is not
"Americayythat buys champagne from "France." It is always an individual American who buys it from an individual Frenchman.
As far as there is still some room left for the actions of individuals,
as far as there is private ownership and exchange of goods and services
between individuals, there is no Volkswirtschaft. Only if full government control is substituted for the choices of individuals does the
Volkswirtschaft emerge as a real entity.

XVI. PRICES
I.

T h e Pricing Process

N an occasional act of barter in which men who ordinarily do not

I

resort to trading with other people exchange goods ordinarily not
negotiated, the ratio of exchange is determined only within broad
margins. CatalIactics, the theory of exchange ratios and prices, cannot determine at what point within these margins the concrete ratio
will bc established. All that it can assert with rcgard to such exchanges
is that they can be effectcd only if cach party values what hc receives more highly than what he gives away.
T h e recurrence of individual acts of exchange generates the market step by step with the evoIution of the division of labor within
a society based on private property. As it becomes a rulc to produce
for other people's consumption, the lnernbers of society must sell and
buy. T h e multiplication of the acts of exchange and the incrcase in
the number of people offering or asking for the same commodities
narrow the margins betwcen the valuations of the parties. Indirect
exchange and its perfection through the use of money divide the
transactions into two different parts: sale and p u r c h a s e . ' ~ h a tin the
eyes of orlc party is a sale, is f a r thc other party n purchase. T h e
divisibility of money, unlimited for all practical purposes, maltes it
possible to determine thc exchange ratios with nicety. T h e exchange
ratios are now as a rule money priccs. T h e y are determined between
extrcmcly narrow margins: tllc valuations on the one hand of the
marginal buyer and those of the marginal offerer who abstains from
selling, and -the valuations on the other hand of the marginal seller
and those of the marginal potential buyer who abstains from buying.
T h e concatenation of the market is an outcome of the activities of
entrcprcneurs, promoters, speculators, and dealers in futures and in
arbitrage. It has been asscrted that catallactics is based on the assumption-contrary- to reality-that all parties are provided with perfect
knowledge concerning the market data and are thercfore in a position to take best advantage of the most favorable opportunities for

Prices
buying and selling. It is true that some economists really beIieved
that such an assumption is implied in the theory of prices. These
authors not only failed to realize in what respects a world peopled
with men perfectly equal in knowledge and foresight would differ
from the real world which all economists wanted to interpret in
developing their theories; they also erred in being unaware of the
fact that they themselves did not resort to such an assumption in
their own treatment of prices.
In an economic system in which every actor is in a position to
recognize correctly the market situation with the same degree of
insight, the adjustment of prices to every change in the data would
be achieved at one stroke. It is impossible to imagine such uniformity
in the correct cognition and appraisal of changes in data cxccpt by
the intercession of supcrhurnan agencies. W e would have to assume
that every man is approached by an angcl informing him of the
change in data which has occurred and advising him how to adjust
his own conduct in the most adequate way to this change. Certainly
the market that catallactics deals with is filled with people who are to
different degrees aware of the changes in data and who, even if they
have the same information, appraise it differently. T h e operation of
the market reflects the fact that changes in the data are first perceived only by a few peoplc and that different men draw different
conclusions in appraising their effects. The more enterprising and
brighter individuals take the lead, others follow later. T h e shrewder
individuals appreciate conditions more correctly than the less intelligent and therefore succeed better in their actions. Economists
must never disregard in their reasoning the fact that the innate and
acquired inequality of men diffcrentiates their adjustment to the
conditions of their environment.
The driving force of the market process is provided neither by
the consumers nor by the owners of the means of production-land,
capital goods, and labor-but by the promoting and speculating entrepreneurs. These are people intent upon profiting by taking advantage
of differences in prices. Quicker of apprehension and farther-sighted
than other men, they look around for sources of profit. They buy
where and when they deem prices too low, and they sell where and
when they deem prices too high. They approach the owners of the
factors of production, and their competition sends the prices of these
factors up to the limit corresponding to their anticipation of the
future prices of the products. They approach the consumers, and
their competition forces prices of consumers' goods down to the
point at which the whole supply can be sold. Profit-seeking specula-

Hu~nanAction
tion is the driving force of the market as it is the driving force of
production.
On the market agitation never stops. The imaginary construction of
an evenly rotating economy has no counterpart in reality. There can
never emerge a state of affairs in which the sum of the prices of the
complementary factors of production, due allowance being made for
time preference, equals the prices of the products and no further
changes are to be expected. There are always profits to be earned by
somebody. The speculators are always enticed by the expectation of
profit.
T h e imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy is a
mental tool for comprehension of entrepreneurial profit and loss. It
is, to be sure, not a design for comprehension of the pricing process.
The final prices corresponding to this imaginary conception are by
no tncans identical with the market prices. T h e activities of the entrepreneurs or of any other actors on the economic scene are not guided
by consideration of any such things as equilibrium prices and the
evenly rotating economy. The entrepreneurs take into account anticipated future prices, not final prices or equilibrium prices. They discover discrepancies between the height of the prices of the complementary factors of production and the anticipated future prices of
the products, and they are intent upon taking advantage of such
discrepancies. These endeavors of the entrepreneurs would finally
result in the emergence of the evenly rotating economy if no further
changes in the data were to appear.
T h e operation of the entrepreneurs brings about a tendency toward an equalization of prices for the same goods in all subdivisions
of the market, due aIlowance being made for the cost of transportation and the time absorbed by it. Diffcrences in prices which are not
merely transitory and bound to be wiped out by entrepreneurial
action are always the outcome of particular obstacles obstructing the
inherent tendency toward equalization. Some check prevents profitseeking business from interfering. An observer not sufficiently familiar with actual commercial conditions is often at a loss to rccognize
the institutional barriers hindering such equalization. But the merchants concerned always know what makes it impossible for them to
take advantage of such differences.
Statisticians treat this problem too lightly. When they have discovered differences in the wholesale price of a commodity between
two cities or countries, not entirely accounted for by the cost of
transportation, tariffs, and excise duties, they acquiesce in asserting
that the purchasing power of money and the "level" of prices are

di8erent.l On the basis of such statements people draft programs to
remove these differences by monetary measures. However, the root
cause of these differences cannot lie in monetary conditions. If prices
in both countries are quoted in terms of the same kind of money,
it is necessary to answer the question as to what prevents businessmen from embarking upon dealings which are bound to make price
differences disappear. Things are essentially the same if the prices are
expresscd in terms of different kinds of money. For the mutual exchange ratio between various kinds of money tends toward a point
at which there is no further margin left to profitable expIoitation of
differences in commodity prices. Whenever differences in commodity prices between various places pcrsist, it is a task for economic history and descriptive economics to establish what institutional barriers
hinder thc execution of transactions which must result in thc equalization of prices.
All the prices we know arc past prices. They are facts of economic
history. In speaking of present prices we imply that the prices of
thc immediate future wiIl not differ from those of the immediate past.
However, all that is asserted with regard to future prices is merely
an outcome of the understanding of future events.
T h e experience of economic history never tells us morc than that
at a definite date and definite place two parties A and I3 traded a
definite quantity of the commodity a against a definite number of
units of the money p. In speaking of such acts of buying and selling
as the market price of a, we are guided by a thcorctical insight, deduced from an aprioristic starting point. This is the insight that, in
the absence of particular factors making for price differences, the
prices paid at the same time and the same place for equal quantities
of the same commodity tend toward equalization, viz., a final price.
But the actual market prices never reach this final state. T h e various
market prices about which we can get information were determined
under different conditions. It is impermissible to confuse averages
computed from them with the final prices.
Only with regard to fungible commodities negotiated on organized
stock or commodity exchanges is it permissible, in comparing prices,
to assume that they refer to the same quality. Apart from such prices
negotiated in exchanges and from prices of commodities the homogeneity of which can be precisely established by technological analI. Sometimes the difference in price as established by price statistics is apparent
only. T h e price quotations may refer to various qualities of the article concerned.
O r they may, complying with the local usages of commerce, mean different
things. They may, for instance, include or not include packing charges; they
may refer to cash payment o r to payment at a later date; and so on.

328
H m a n Action
ysis, it is a serious bIunder t o disregard differences in the quality
of the commodity in question. Even in the wholesale tradi: of raw
textiles the diversity of the articles plays the main role. A comparison
of prices of consumers' goods is mainly misleading on account of the
difference in quality. T h e quantity traded in one transaction too is
relevant in the determination of the price paid per unit. Shares of a
corporation sold in one large lot bring a different price than those sold
in several small lots.
I t is necessary to emphasize these facts again and again because it
is customary nowadays to play off the statistical elaboration of price
data against the theory of prices. However, the statistics of prices
is altogether questionable. Its foundations are precarious because circumstances for the most part do not permit the comparison of the
various data, their linking together in series, and the computation of
averages. Full of zeaI to embark upon mathematical operations, the
statisticians yield to the temptation of disregarding the incomparability of the data available. T h e information that a certain firm sold
at a definite date a definite type of shoes for six dollars a pair relates
a fact of economic history. A study of the behavior of shoe prices
from 1923 to 1939 is conjectural, however sophisticated the methods
applied may be.
Catallactics shows that entrepreneurial activities tend toward an
abolition of price differences not caused by the costs of transportation and trade barriers. N o experience has ever contradicted this
theorem. T h e results obtained by an arbitrary identification of unequal things are irrelevant.
2.

Valuation and Appraisement

T h e ultimate source of the determination of prices is the value
judgments of the consumers. Prices are the outcome of the valuation
preferring LI to 6. They are social phenomena as they are brought
about b y thc interplay of the valuations of all individuals participating
in the operation of the market. Each individual, in buying or not
buying and in selling or not selling, contributes his share to the formation of the market prices. But the larger the market is, the smaller is
the weight of each individual's contribution. Thus the structure of
market prices appears to the individual as a datum to which he must
adjust his own conduct.
T h e valuations which result in determination of definite prices are
different. Each party attaches a higher value to the good he receives
than to that he gives away. T h e exchange ratio, the price, is not

Przces

3 29

the product of an equality of valuation, but, on the contrary, the
product of a discrepancy in valuation.
Appraisement must be clearly distinguished from valuation. Appraisement in no way depends upon the subjective valuation of the
man who appraises. H e is not intent upon establishing the subjective
use-value of the good concerned, but upon anticipating the prices
which the market will determine. Valuation is a value judgment expressive of a difference in value. Appraisement is the anticipation of
an expected fact. It aims at establishing what prices will be paid on
the market for a particular commodity or what amount of money
ill be required for the purchase of a definite cormrnodity.
Valuation and appraisement arc, however, closely connected. T h e
valuations of an autarkic husbandman directly compare the weight
he attaches to different means for the removal of uneasiness. T h e valuations of a man buying and selling on the market must not disregard
the structure of market prices; they depend upon appraisement. In
order to know the meaning of a price one must know the purchasing
power of the amount of moncy concerned. It is necessary by and
large to be familiar with the prices of those goods which one would
like to acquire and to form on the ground of such Itnowledge an
opinion a1)ont their future prices. If an individual speaks of the costs
incurred by the purchase of some goods already acquired or to be
incurred b y the purchase of goods he plans to acquire, he expresses
these costs in t e r m of moncy. But this amount of money represents
in his eyes the degree of satisfaction he could obtain b y employing it
for the acquisition of other goods. T h e valuation ~nakesa detour,
it goes via the appraisement of the structure of market prices; but
i t always aims finally at the comparison of alternative modes for the
removal of felt uneasiness.
It is ultimately always the subjective value judgments of individuals
that determine the formation of prices. CatalIactics in conceiving the
pricing process necessarily reverts to the fundamental category of
action, the preference given t o a over b. In view of popular errors it is
expedient to emphasize that catallactics deals with the real prices as
they are paid in definite transactions and not with imaginary prices.
The concept of final prices is merely a mental tool for the grasp of a
particular problem, the emergence of entrepreneurial profit and loss.
T h e concept of a "just" or "fair" price is devoid of any scientific
meaning; i t is a disguise for wishes, a striving for a state of affairs
different from reality. Market prices are entirely determined by the
value judgments of men as they really act.
If one says that prices tend toward a point at which total demand is

330

Human Action

equal to total supply, one resorts to another mode of expressing the
same concatenation of phenomena. Demand and supply are the outcome of the conduct of those buying and selling. If, other things being equal, supply increases, prices must drop. At the previous price
all those ready to pay this price could buy the quantity they wanted
to buy. If the supply increases, they must buy larger quantities or
other people who did not buy before must become interested in
buying. 'This can only be attained at a lower price.
It is possible to visualize this interaction by drawing two curves,
the demand curve and the supply curve, whose intersection shows
the price. It is no less possibIe to express it in mathematical symbols.
But it is necessary to comprehend that such pictorial or mathematical
modes of representation do not affect the essence of our interpretation and that they do not add a whit to our insight. Furthermore it
is important to realize that we do not have any knowledge or experience concerning the shape of such curves. Always, what we know
is only market prices-that is, not the curves but only a point which
we interpret as the intersection of two hypothetical curves. The drawing of such curves may prove expedient in visualizing the problems
for undergraduates. For the real tasks of catallactics they are mere
byplay.

3. The Prices of the Goods of Higher Orders
The market process is coherent and indivisible. It is an indissoluble
intertwinement of actions and reactions, of moves and countermoves.
But the insufficiency of our mentaI abilities enjoins upon us the necessity of dividing it into parts and analyzing each of these parts separately. In resorting to such artificial cleavages we must never forget
that the seemingly autonomous existence of these parts is an imaginary
makeshift of our minds. They are only parts, that is, they cannot even
be thought of as existing outside the structure of which they are
parts.
The prices of the goods of higher orders are ultimately determined
by the prices of the goods of the first or lowest order, that is, the
consumers' goods. As a consequence of this dependence they are
ultimately determined by the subjective vahations of all members of
the market society. It is, however, important to realize that we are
faced with a connection of prices, not with a connection of valuations.
The prices of the complementary factors of production are conditioned by the prices of the consumers' goods. The factors of production are appraised with regard to the prices of the products, and from

Prices

331

this appraisement their prices emerge. Not the valuations but the
appraisements are transferred from the goods of the first order to
those of higher orders. T h e prices of the consumers' goods engender
the actions resulting in the determination of the prices of the factors
of production. These prices are primarily connected only with the
prices of the consumers' goods. With the valuations of the individuals
they are only indirectly connected, viz., through the intermediary of
thewprices03 the consumers' goods, the products of their joint employment.
The tasks incumbent upon the theory of the prices of factors of
production are to be solved by the same methods which are employed
for treatment of the prices of consumers' goods. W e conceive the
operation of the market of consumers' goods in a twofold way. W e
think on the one hand of a state of affairs which leads to acts of exchange; the situation is such that the uneasiness of various individuals
can be removed to some extent because various peopIe value the same
goods in a different way. On the other hand we think of a situation
in which no further acts of exchange can happen because no actor
expects any further improvement of his satisfaction b y further acts
of exchange. W e proceed in the same way in comprehending the
formation of the prices of factors of production. T h e operation of
this market is actuated and kept in motion b y the exertion of the
promoting entrepreneurs, eager to profit from differences in the
market prices of the factors of production and the expected prices of
the products. T h e operation of this market would stop if a situation
were ever to emerge in which the sum of the prices of the complementary factors of production-but for interest-equaled the prices
of the products and nobody believed that further price changes were
to be expected. Thus wc have described the process adequately and
completely by pointing out, positively, what actuates it and, negatively, what would suspend its motion. T h e main importance is to be
attached to the positive description. T h e negative description resulting in the imaginary constructions of the final price and the evenly
rotating economy is merely auxiliary. For the task is not the treatment of imaginaEy concepts, which never appear in Iife and action,
but the treatment of the market prices at which the goods of higher
orders are really bought and sold.
This method we owe to Gossen, Carl Mcnger, and Biihm-Bawerk.
Its main merit is that it implies the cognition that we are faced with
a phenomenon of price determination inextricably linked with the
market process. I t distinguishes between two things: (a) the direct
valuation of the factors of production which attaches the value of

332

Human Action

the product to the total complex of the cotnplementary factors of
production. and (6) the prices of the single factors of production
which are formed on the market as rhc resultant of the concurring
actions of competing highest bidders. Valuation as it can be practiced
by an isolated actor (Robinson Crusoe or a socialist board of prodiction management) can never result in a determination of such
a thing as quotas of value. Valuation can only arrange goods in scales
of prefcrence. It can never attach to a good something that could be
called a quantity or magnitude of value. I t would be absurd to speak
of a sum of valuations or values. It is permissible to declare that, due
allowance being made for time preference, the value attached to a
product is equal to the value of the total complex of complementary
factors of production. But it would be nonsensical to assert that the
value attached to a product is equal to the "sum" of the values attached
to the various complementary factors of production. One cannot
add up values or valuations. One can add up prices expressed in terms
of money, but not scales of preference. One cannot divide values
or single out quotas of them. A value judgment never consists in anything other than preferring a to h.
T h e process of value imputation does not result in derivation of
the value of the singlc productive agents from the value of their joint
product. It does not bring about results which could serve as elements
of economic calculation. It is onlv the markct that, in establishing
prices for each factor of productidn, creates the conditions required
for economic calculation. Economic calculation always deals with
prices, never with values.
T h e market determines prices of factors of production in the same
way in which it determines prices of consumers' goods. T h e market
process is an interaction of mcn deliberately striving after the best
possible ren~ovalof dissatisfaction. I t is impbssible to think away or
to eliminate from the market proccss the men actuating its operation.
One cannot deal with the rnarkct of consumers' goods and disregard
the actions of the consumers. One cannot deal with the market of the
goods of higher orders while disregarding the actions of the entrepreneurs and the fact that the use of money is essential in their transactions. There is nothing automatic or mechanical in the operation
of the market. T h e entrepreneurs, eager to earn profits, appear as
bidders at an auction, as it were, in which the owners of the factors
of production put up for sale land, capital goods, and labor. T h e
entrepreneurs are eager to outdo one another b y bidding higher
prices than thcir rivals. Their offers are limited on the one hand b y
their anticipation of future prices of the products and on the other

Prices
hand by the necessity to snatch the factors of production away from
the hands of other entrepreneurs competing with thcm.
The entrepreneur is the agency that prevcnts the persistence of a
state of production unsuitable to fill the most urgent wants of the
consumers in the cheapest way. All people are anxious for the best
possible satisfaction of their wants and arc in this sense striving after
the highest profit they can reap. The mentality of the promoters,
speculators, and entrepreneurs is not different from that of their fellow men. They are merely superior to thc masses in mental power
and energy. They are the leaders on the way toward material progress.
They are the first to understand that there is a discrepancy between
what is done and what could be done. They guess what the consumers
would like to have and arc intent upon providing them with these
things. In the pursuit of such plans they bid higher prices for some
factors of production and lower the prices of other factors of production by restricting their demand for them. In supplying the market
with those consumers' goods in the sale of which the highest profits
can be earned, they create a tendcncy toward a fall in their prices. In
restricting the output of those consumers' goods the production of
which does not offer chances for reaping profit, they bring about a
tendency toward a rise in their prices. All these transformations go
on ceaselessly and could stop only if the unrealizable conditions of the
evenly rotating economy and of static equilibrium were to be attained.
In drafting their plans the entrepreneurs look first at the prices of
the immediate past which are mistakenly called presefzt prices. Of
course, the entrepreneurs never make these prices enter into their
calculations without paying regard to anticipated changes. The prices
of the immediate past are for them only the starting point of deliberations Ieading to forecasts of future prices. The prices of the past do not
influence the determination of future prices. It is, on the contrary, the
anticipation of future prices of the products that determines the state
of prices of the complementary factors of production. The determination of prices has, as far as the mutual exchange ratios between
various commodities are concerned,"~ direct causal relation whatever with the prices of the past. The allocation of the nonconvertible
factors of production among the various branches of production
and the amount of capital goods availabIe for future production are
2. It is different with regard to the mutual exchange ratios between money and
the vendible commodities and services. Cf. below, pp. 407-408.
3. T h e problem of the nonconvertible capital goods is dealt with below, pp.

499-505.

334

Humam Action

historical magnitudes; in this regard the past is instrumental in shaping
the course of future production and in affecting the prices of the
future. But directly the prices of the factors of production are determined exclusively by the anticipation of future prices of the products.
The fact that yesterday people valued and appraised commodities in
a different way is irrelevant. The consumers do not care about the
investments made with regard to past market conditions and do not
bother about the vested interests of entrepreneurs, capitalists, landowners, and workers, who may be hurt by changes in the structure
of prices. Such sentiments play no role in the formation of prices. (It
is precisely the fact that the market does not respect vested interests
that makes the people concerned ask for government interference.)
Thc prices of the past are for the entrepreneur, the shaper of future
production, merely a mental tool. The entrepreneurs do not construct afresh every day a radically new structure of prices or allocate
anew the factors of production to the various branches of industry.
They merely transform what the past has transmitted in better adapting it to the altered conditions. How much of the previous conditions
they preserve and how much they change depends on the extent to
which the data have changed.
T h e cconomic process is a continuous interplay of production and
consumption. Today's activities are linked with those of the past
through the technological knowledge at hand, the amount and the
quality of the capital goods available, and the distribution of the
ownership of these goods among various individuals. They are linked
with the future through the very essence of human action; action is
always directed toward the improvement of future conditions. In
order to see his way in the unknown and uncertain future man has
within his reach only two aids: experience of past events and his
faculty of understanding. Knowledge about past prices is a part of
this experience and at the same time the starting point of understand- the future.
ing
If the memory of all prices of the past were to fade away, the
pricing process would become more troublesome, but not impossible
as far as the mutual exchange ratios between various commodities are
concerned. It would be harder for the entrepreneurs to adjust production to the demand of the public, but it could be done nonetheless.
It would be necessary for them to assemble anew all the data they
need as the basis of their operations. They would not avoid mistakes
which they now evade on account of experience at their disposal.
Price fluctuations would be more violent at the beginning, factors of
production would be wasted, want-satisfaction would be impaired.

But finally, having paid dearly, people would again have acquired the
experience needed for a smooth working of the market process.
T h e essential fact is that it is the competition of profit-seeking entrepreneurs that docs not tolerate the preservation of false prices of the
factors of production. T h e activities of the entrepreneurs are the
element that would bring about the unrealizable state of the evenly
rotating cconomy if no further changes werc t o occur. I n the worldembracing public sale called the market they arc the bidders for the
factors of production. In bidding, they arc the mandataries of the consumers, as it werc. Each entrepreneur represents a different aspect
of the consumers' wants, either a different commodity or another way
of producing the same commodity. T h e competition among the entrepreneurs is ultimately a competition among the various possibilities
open to men to remove their uneasiness as far as possible by the
acquisition of consumers' goods. T h e decisions of the consumers to
tmy one commodity and to postpone buying another determine the
prices of factors of production required for manufacturing these
commodities. T h e competition between the entrepreneurs reflects
the prices of consumers' goods in the formation of the prices of the
factors of production. I t reflects in the external world the conflict
which the inexorable scarcity of the factors of production brings
about in the soul of each individual. It makes effective the subsumed
decisions of the consumers as to what purpose the nonspecific factors
should be used for and to what extent the spccific factors of production should be used.
T h e pricing process is a social process. It is consummated by an
interaction of all members of the society. All collaborate and cooperate, each in the particuIar role he has chosen for himself in the
framework of the division of labor. Competing in cooperation and
coopcrating in competition all people are instrumental in bringing
about the result, viz., the price structure of the market, the allocation
of the factors of production to the various lines of want-satisfaction,
and the determination of the share of each individual. These three
events are not three different matters. They are only different aspects
of one indivisible phenomenon which our analytical scrutiny separates
into three parts. In the market process they arc accomplished uno actu.
Only people prepossessed by sociaIist leanings who cannot free themselves from longing glances at socialist methods speak of three different processes in dealing with the market phenomena: thc detcrmination of prices, the direction of productive efforts, and distribution.

3 36

Human Action
A Limitation on the Pricing of Factors of Production

The process which makes the prices of the factors of production spring
from the prices of products can achieve its results only if, of the complementary factors not replaceable by substitutes, not more than one is of
absolutely specific character, that is, is not suitable for any other employment. If the production of a product requires two or more absolutely
specific factors, only a cumulative price can be assigned to them. If all
factors of production were absolutely specific, the pricing process would
not achieve more than such cumulative prices. It would accomplish nothing more than statements like this: as combining 3 a and 5 b produces one
unit of p, 3 a and 5 b together are equal to I p and the final price of 3 a 15 b
is--due allowance being made for time preference-equal to the final price
of I p. As entrepreneurs who want to use a and b for purposes other than
the production of p do not bid for them, a more detailed price dctermination is impossible. Only if a demand emerges for a (or for b ) on the part of
entrepreneurs who want to employ a (or b ) for other purposes, does competition between them and the entrepreneurs planning the production of p
arise and a price for a (or for b) comes into existence, the height of which
determines also the price of b (or a).
A world in which all the factors of production are absolutely specific
could manage its affairs with such cumulative prices. In such a world there
would not exist the problem of how to allocate the means of production to
various branches of want-satisfaction. In our real world things are different.
There are many scarce means of production which can be employed for
various tasks. There the economic problem is to employ these factors in
such a way that no unit of them should be used for the satisfaction of a less
urgent need if this employment prevents the satisfaction of a more urgent
need. It is this that the market solves in determining the prices of the factors
of production. The social service rendered by this solution is not in the
least impaired by the fact that for factors which can be employed only
cumuIativcly no other than cumulative prices are determined.
Factors of production which can be used in the same ratio of combination for the production of various commodities but do not allow of any
other use, are to be considered as absolutely specific factors. They are
absolutely specific with regard to the production of an intermediary product which can be utilized for various purposes. The price of this intermediary product can be assigned to them cumulatively only. Whether
this intermediary product can be directly apperceived by the senses or
whether it is merely the invisible and intangible outcome of their joint
employment makes no difference.

4. Cost Accounting
In the calculation of the entrepreneur costs are the amount of
money required for the procurement of the factors of production.

Prices

337

T h e entrepreneur is intent upon embarking upon those business projects from which he expects the highest surplus of proceeds over
costs and upon shunning projects from which he expects a lower
amount of profit or even a loss. In doing this he adjusts his effort to
the best possible satisfaction of the needs of the consumers. The fact
that a project is not profitable because costs are higher than proceeds
is the outcome of the fact that there is a more useful employment available for the factors of production requircd. There are other products
in the purchase of which the consumers are prcpared to allow for the
prices of the factors of production required. But the consumers are
not prepared to pay these prices in buying the commodity the production of which is not profitable.
Cost accounting is affected by thc fact that the two following
conditions are not always present:
First, every incrcase in the quantity of factors cxpended for the
production of a consumers' good increases its power to remove uneasiness.
Second, cvery incrcase in the quantity of a consumers' good requires a proportional increase in the expenditure of factors of production or even a more than proportional increase in their expenditure.
If both thcse conditions were always and without any exception fultiIled, every increment z expendcd for increasing the quantity
7n of a commodity g would be employed for the satisfaction of a need
viewed as less urgent than the ieast urgent nced already satisfied by the
quantity m available previously. At the same time the increment z
would require the employment of factors of production to be withdrawn from the satisfaction of other needs considered as more pressing than thosc needs whose satisfaction was foregone in order to
produce the marginal unit of m. On the one hand the marginal value
of the satisfaction derived from the increase in the quantity available
of g would drop. On the other hand the costs required for the production of additiond quantities of g would increase in marginal disutility; factors of production would be withheld from employments
in which they could satisfy morc urgent needs. Production must
stop at the point at which the marginal utility of the increment no
longer compensates for the marginal increase in the disutility of costs.
Now these two conditions are present very often, but not generally
without exception. There exist many commodities of a11 orders of
goods whose physical structure is not homogeneous and which are
therefore not perfectly divisible.
I t would, of course, be possible to conjure away the deviation from

3 38

Human Action

the first condition mentioned above by a sophisticated play on words.
One could say: half a motorcar is not a motorcar. If one adds to half
a motorcar a quarter of a motorcar, one does not increase the "quantity" available; only the perfection of the process of production which
turns out a complete car produces a unit and an increase in the "quantity" available. However, such an interpretation misses the point. The
problem we must face is that not every increase in expenditure increases proportionately the objective use-value, the physical power
of a thing to render a definite service. The various increments in
expenditure bring about different results. There arc increments the
expenditure of which remains useless if no further increments of a
definite quantity arc added.
On the other hand-and this is the deviation from the second condition-an increase in physical omput does not always require a
proportionate increase in cxpenditurc or even any additional expenditure. It may happen that costs do not rise at all or that their rise
increases output more than proportionately. For many means of
production are not homogeneous either and not pcrfec;ly divisible.
This is the phenomenon known to business as the superiority of bigscale production. The economists speak of the law of increasing returns or decreasing costs.
W c consider-as case A-a state of affairs in which ail factors of
production are not perfectly divisible in such a way that full utilization of the productive services rendered by every further indivisible
element of each factor requires full utilization of the further indivisible elements of every other of the conlplementary factors. Then
in every aggregate of productive agents each of the assembled elements-every machine, every worker, every piece of raw materialcan be fully utilized only if all the productive services of the other
elements are fully employed too. Within these limits the production
of a part of the maximum output attainable does not require a higher
expenditure than the production of the highest possible output. We
may also say that the minimum-size aggregate always produces the
same quantity of products; it is impossible to produce a smaller quantity of products even if there is no use for a part of it.
W e consider-as case B-a state of affairs in which one group of the
productive agents ( p ) is for all practical purposes perfectly divisible.
On the other hand the imperfectly divisible agents can be divided
in such a way that full utilization of the services rcndered by each
further indivisible part of one agent requires full utilization of the
further indivisible parts of the other imperfectly divisible complementary factors. Then increasing production of an aggregate of

Prices

339

further indivisible factors from a partiaI to a more complete utilization of their productive capacity requires merely an increase in the
quantity of p, the perfectly divisible factors. However, one must
guard oneself against the fallacy that this necessarily implies a decrease in the average cost of production. It is true that within the
aggregate of imperfectIy divisible factors each of them is now better
utilized, that therefore costs of production as far as they are caused
by the cooperation of these factors remain unchanged,. and that the
quotas falling to a unit of output are decreasing. But on the other
hand an increase in the employment of the perfectly divisible factors
of production can be attained only by withdrawing them from other
employments. The value of these other employments increases, other
things being equal, with their shrinking; the price of these perfectly
divisible factors tends to rise as more of them are used for the better
utilization of the productive capacity of the aggregate of the not
further divisible factors in question. One must not limit the consideration of our problem to the case in which the additional quantity of p
is withdrawn from other enterprises producing the same product in
a less efficient way and forces these enterprises to restrict their output.
It is obvious that in this case-competition between a more and a less
efficient enterprise producing the same article out of the same raw
materials-the average cost of production is decreasing in the expanding plant. A more general scrutiny of the problem leads to a different result. If the units of p are withdrawn from other employments
in which they would have been utilized for the production of other
articles, there emerges a tendency toward an increase in the price
of these units. This tendency may be compensated by accidental
tendencies operating in the opposite direction; it may sometimes be so
feeble that its effects are negligible. But it is always present and
potentially influences the configuration of costs.
Finally we consider-as case C-a state of affairs in which the various imperfectly divisible factors of production can be divided only
in such a way that, given the conditions of the market, any size which
can be chosen for their assemblage in a production aggregate does not
alIow for a combination in which full utilization of the productive
capacity of one factor makes possible full utilization of the productive
capacity of the other imperfectly divisible factors. This case C alone
is of practical significance, while the cases A and B hardly play any
role in real business. The characteristic feature of case is that the
configuration of production costs varies unevenly. If all imperfectly
divisible factors are utilized to lcss than full capacity, an expansion of
production res~~lts
in a decrease of average costs of production unless

340
Human Action
a rise in the prices to be paid for the perfectly divisible factors
counterbalances this outcome. But as soon as full utilization of the
capacity of one of the imperfectly divisible factors is attained, further expansion of production causes a sudden sharp rise in costs. Then
again a tendency toward a decrease in average production costs sets
in and goes on working until full utilization of one of the imperfectly
divisible factors is attained anew.
Other things being equal, the more the production of a certain
article increases, the more factors of production must be withdrawn
from other employments in which they would have been used for the
production of other articles. Hence-other things being equalaverage production costs increase with the increase in the quantity
produced. But this general law is by sections superseded by the
phenomenon that not all factors of production are perfectly divisible
and that, as far as they can be divided, they are not divisible in such
a way that full utilization of one of them results in full utilization of
the other imperfectly divisible factors.
T h e planning entrepreneur is always faced with the question: T o
what extent will the anticipated prices of the products exceed the
anticipated costs? If the entrepreneur is still free with regard to the
project in question, because he has not yet made any inconvertible
investments for its realization, it is average costs that count for him.
But if he has already a vested interest in the line of business concerned,
he sees things from the angle of additional costs to be expended. H e
who already owns a not fully utilized production aggregate does not
take into account average cost of production but ~narginalcost. Without regard to the amount already expended for inconvertible investments he is merely interested in the question whether or not the
proceeds from the sale of an additional quantity of products will
exceed the additional cost incurred by their production. Even if the
whole amount invested in the inconvertible production facilities must
be wiped off as loss, he goes on producing provided he expects a
reasonable surplus of proceeds over current costs.
With regard to popular errors it is necessary to emphasize that
if the conditions required for the appearance of monopoly prices are
not present, an entrepreneur is not in a position to increase his net
returns by restricting production beyond the amount conforming
with consumers' demand. But this problem will be dealt with later
in section 6.
4. Reasonable means in this connection that the anticipated returns on the
convertible capital used for the continuation of production are at least not lower
than the anticipated returns on its use for other projects.

Prices

341

That a factor of production is not perfectly divisible does not

always mean that it can be constructed and employed in one size
only. This, of course, may occur in some cases. But as a rule it is possible to vary the dimensions of these factors. If out of the various
dimensions which are possible for such a factor-e.g., a machineone dimension is distinguished by the fact that the costs incurred by
its production and operation are rendered lower per unit of the
productive services than those for other dimensions, things are essentially identical. Then the superiority of the bigger plant does not
consist in the fact that it utilizes a machine to full capacity while the
smaller plant utilizes only a part of the capacity of a machine of the
same size. It consists rather in the fact that the bigger plant employs
a machine which operates with a better utilization of the factors of
production required for its construction and operation than does the
smaller machine employed by the smaller plant.
T h e role played in all branches of production by the fact that many
factors of production are not perfectly divisible is very great. It is
of paramount importance in the course of industrial affairs. But one
must guard oneself against many misinterpretations of its significance.
One of these errors was the doctrine according to which in the processing industries there prevails a law of increasing returns, while in
agriculture and mining a law of decreasing returns prevails. T h e
fallacies implied have been exploded above."s
far as there is a difference in this regard between conditions in agriculture and those in
the processing industries, differences in the data bring them about.
The immobility of the soil and the fact that the performance of the
various agricultural operations depends on the seasons make it impossible for farmers to take advantage of the capacity of many movable factors of production to the degree which conditions in manufacturing for the most part allow. The optimum size of a production
outfit in agricultural production is as a rule much smaller than in the
processing industries. It is obvious and does not need any further
explanation why the concentration of farming cannot be pushed to
anything near the degree obtaining in the processing industries.
However, the inequality in the distribution of natural resources
over the earth's surface, which is one of the two factors making for
the higher productivity of the division of labor, puts a limit to the
progress of concentration in the processing industries also. The tendency toward a progressive specialization and the concentration of
integrated industrial processes in only a few plants is counteracted by
the geographical dispersion of natural resources. The fact that the
5. Cf. above, p. 130.

342
Human Action
production of raw materials and foodstuffs cannot be centralized
and forces people to disperse over the various parts of the earth's
surface enjoins also upon the processing industries a certain degree
of decentralization. I t makes it necessary to consider the problems of
transportation as a particular factor of production costs. T h e costs of
transportation must be weighed against the economies to be expected
from more thoroughgoing specialization. W7hile in some branches of
the processing industries the utmost concentration is the most adequate net hod of reducing costs, in other branches a certain degree of
decentralization is more advantageous. In the servicing trades the disadvantages of concentration become so great that they almost entirely overweigh the advantages derived.
Then a historical factor comes into play. In the past capital goods
were immobilized on sites on which our contemporaries would not
have set them. It is immaterial whether or not this immobilization was
the most economical procedure to which the generations that brought
it about could resort. In any event the present generation is faced with
a fait accompli. It must adjust its operations to the fact and it must
take it into account in dealing with problems of the location of the
processing i n d ~ s t r i e s . ~
Finally there are institutional factors. There are trade and migration barriers. There are differences in political organization and methods of government between various countries. Vast areas are administered in such a way that it is practically out of the question to choose
them as a seat for any capital investment no matter how favorable their
physical conditions may be.
Entrepreneurial cost accounting must deal with all these geographical, hjstorical and institutional factors. But even apart from them there
are purely tcchnical factors limiting the optimum size of plants and
firms. T h e greater plant or firm may require provisions and procedures which the smaller plant or firm can avoid. In: many instances
the outlays caused by such provisions and procedures may be overcompensated by the reduction in costs derived from better utiiization
of the capacity of some of the not perfectly divisible factors employed.
In other instances this may not be the case.
Under capitalism the irithmetical operations required for cost
accounting and the confrontation of costs and proceeds can easily be
effected as there are methods of economic calculation available. However, cost accounting and calculation of the economic significance of
6. For a thoroughgoing treatment of the conservatism enjoined upon men by
the limited convertibility of many capital goods, the historically determined
element in production, see below, pp. 499-510.

Prices
business projects under consideration is not merely a mathematical
problem which can be solved satisfactorily by all those familiar with
the elementary rules of arithmetic. T h e main question is the determination of the money equivalents of the items which are to enter
into the cakulation. It is a mistake to assume, as many economists do,
that these equivalents are given magnitudes, uniquely determined by
the state of economic conditions. They are speculative anticipations
of uncertain future conditions and as such depend on the entrepreneur's understanding of the future state of the market. The term
fixed costs is also in this regard somewhat misleading.
Every action aims at the best possible supplying of future needs.
T o achicve these ends it must make the best possible use of the available factors of production. However, the historical process which
brought about the present state of factors available is beside the point.
What counts and influences the decisions concerning future action
is solely the outcome of this historical process, the quantity and the
quality of the factors available today. These factors are appraised
only with regard to their ability to render producrive services for the
removal of future uneasiness. T h e amount of money spent in the past
for their production and acquisition is immaterial.
It has already been pointed out that an entrepreneur who by the
time he has to make a new decision has expended money for the
realization of a definite project is in a differcnt position from that of
a man who starts afresh. The former owns a complex of inconvertible
factors of production which he can employ for ccrtain purposes. His
decisions concerning further action will be influenced by this fact.
But he appraises this complex not according to what he expended in
the past for its acquisition. H e appraises it exclusively from the point
of view of its usefulness for future action. The fact that he has spent
more or less for its acquisition is insignificant. This fact is only a factor
in determining the amount of the entrepreneur's past losses or profits
and the prescnt state of his fortune. It is an element in the historical
process that brought about the present state of the supply of factors
of production and as such it is of importance for future action. But
it does not count for the planning of future action and the calculation
regarding such action. It is irrelevant that the entries in the firm's
books differ from the actual price of such inconvertible factors of
production.
Of course, such consummated losses or profits may motivate a
firm to operate in a different way from which it would if it were not
affected by them. Past losses may render a firm's financial position
precarious, especially if they bring about indebtedness and burden

3 44

Human Action

it with payments of interest and installments on the principal. However, it is not correct to refer to such payments as a part of fixed
costs. They have no relation whatever to the current operations.
They are not caused by the process of production, but by the methods
employed by the entrepreneur in the past for the procurement of the
capital and capital goods needed. They are only accidental with
reference to the going concern. But they may enforce upon the firm
in question a conduct of affairs which it would not adopt if it were
financially stronger. The urgent need for cash in order to meet payments due does not affect its cost accounting, but its appraisal of ready
cash as compared w-it11 cash that can only be received at a later day.
It may impel the firm to sell inventories at an inappropriate moment
and to use its durable production equipment in a way that unduly
neglects its conservation for later use.
It is immaterial for the problems of cost accounting whether a firm
owns the capital invested in its enterprise or whether it has borrowed
a greater or smaller part of it and is bound to comply with the terms
of a loan contract rigidly fixing the rate of interest and the dates of
maturity for interest and principal. The costs of production include
only the interest on the capital which is still existent and working in
the enterprise. It does not include interest on capital squandered jn
the past by bad investment or by inefficiency in the conduct of current business operations. T h e task incumbent upon the businessman
is always to use the supply of capital goods now available in the best
possible way for the satisfaction of future needs. In the pursuit of
this aim he must not be misled by past errors and failures the consequences of which cannot be brushed away. A plant may have been
constructed in the past which would not have been built if one had
better forecast the present situation. I t is vain to lament this historical fact. The main thing is to find out whether or not the plant
can still render any service and, if this question is answered in the
affirmative, hour it can be best utilized. It is certainly sad for the individual entrepreneur that he did not avoid errors. The losses incurred impair his financial situation. They do not affect the costs to
be taken into account in planning further action.
It is important to stress this point because it has been distorted in
the current interpretation and justification of various measures. One
does not '%educe costs" by alleviating some firms' and corporations'
burden of debts. A policy of wiping out debts or the interest due
on them totally or in part does not reduce costs. It transfers wealth
from creditors to debtors; it shifts the incidence of losses incurred
in the past from one group of people to another group, e.g., from

Prices

345

the owners of common stock to those of preferred stock and corporate bonds. This argument of cost reduction is often advanced in
favor of currency devaluation. I t is no less fallacious in this case than
all the other arguments brought forward for this purpose.
What are commonly called fixed costs are also the costs incurred
by the exploitation of the already available factors of production
which are either rigidly inconvertihle or can be adapted for other
productive purposes only at a considerable loss. These factors are of
a more durable character than the other factors of production required. But they are not permanent. They are used up in the process
of production. With each unit of product turned out a part of the
n~achine'spower to produce is cxhausted. 'The extent of this attrition
can be precisely ascertained by technology and can be appraised
accordingly in terms of money.
However, it is not only this money equivalent of the machine's
wearing out which the entrepreneurial calculation has to consider. The
t)usinessman is not merely concerned with thc duration of the machine's technological life. He must take into account the future state
of the market. Although a machine may still be technologically perfectly utilizable, market conditions may render it obsolete and worthless. If the demand for its products drops considerably or disappears
altogether or if more efficient methods for supplying the consumers
with these products appear, the machine is economically merely scrap
iron. In planning the conduct of his business the entrepreneur must
pay full regard to the anticipated future state of the market. The
amount of "fixed" costs which enter into his calculation depends
on his understanding of future events. It is not to be fixed simply by
technological reasoning.
The technologist may determine the optimum for a production
aggregate's utilization. But this technological optimum may differ
from that which the entrepreneur on the ground of his judgment concerning future market conditions enters into his economic calculation.
Let us assume that a factory is equipped with machines which can be
utilized for a period of ten years. Every year ro per cent of their
prime costs is laid aside for depreciation. In the third year market
conditions place a dilemma before the entrepreneur. H e can double
his output for the year and sell it at a price which (apart from covering the increase id variable costs) exceeds the quota of depreciation
for the current year and the present value of the last depreciation
quota. But this doubling of production trebles the wearing out of
the equipment and the surplus proceeds from the saIe of the double
quantity of products are not great enough to make good also for the

346
Human Action
present value of the depreciation quota of the ninth year. If the entrepreneur were to consider the annuaI depreciation quota as a rigid
element for his calculation, he would have to deem the doubling of
production as not profitable, as additional proceeds lag behind additional cost. He would abstain from expanding production beyond
the technological optimum. But the entrepreneur calculates in a different way, although in his accountancy he may lay aside the same
quota for depreciation every year. Whether or not the entrcpreneur
prefers a fraction of the present value of the ninth year's depreciation
quota to the technological services which the machines could render
him in the ninth year, depends on his opinion concerning the future
state of the market.
Public opinion, governments and legislators, and the tax laws look
upon a business outfit as a source of permanent revenue. They believe
that the entrcpreneur who makes due allowance for capital maintenance by annual depreciation quotas will aIways be in a position to
reap a reasonable return from the capital invested in his durable
producers' goods. Real conditions are different. A production aggregate such as a plant and its equipment is a factor of production
whose usefulness depends on changing marltet conditions and the skill
of the entrepreneur in employing it in accordance with the change
in conditions.
There is in the field of economic calculation nothing that is certain
in the sense in which this term is used with regard to technological
facts. The esscntial elements of economic calculation are speculative
anticipations of future conditions. Commercial usages and customs
and commercial laws have established definite rules for accountancy
and auditing. There is accuracy in the keeping of books. But they are
accurate only with regard to these rules. The book values do not reflect precisely the real state of affairs. T h e market value of an aggregate of durable producers' goods may differ from the nominal figures
the books show. The proof is that the Stock Exchange appraises them
without any regard to these figures.
Cost accounting is therefore not an arithmetical process which can
be estabIished and examined by an indifferent umpire. It does not
operate w-ith uniquely determined magnitudes which can be found
out in an objective way. Its esscntial items are the result of an understanding of future conditions, necessarily always colored by the
entrepreneur's opinion about the future state of the market.
Attempts to establish cost accounts on an "impartial" basis are
doomed to failure. Calculating costs is a mental tool of action, the purposive design to make the best of the available means for an improve-

Prices

347

ment of future conditions. It is necessarily volitional, not factual. In
the hands of an indifferent umpire it changes its character entirely.
The umpire does not look forward to the future. He looks backward
to the dead past and to rigid rules which are useless for real life and
action. H e does not anticipate changes. H e is unwittingly guided by
the prepossession that the evenly rotating economy is the normal and
most desirable state of human affairs. Profits do not fit into his scheme.
H e has a confused idea about a "fair" rate of profit or a "fair" return
on capital invested. However, there are no such things. In the evenly
rotating economy there are no profits. In a changing economy profits
are not determined with reference to any set of rules by which they
could be classified as fair or unfair. Profits are never normal. Where
there is normality, i.e., absence of change, no profits can emerge.

5. Logical Catallactics Versus Mathematical Catallactics
The problems of prices and costs have been treated also with
mathematical methods. There have even been economists who held
that the only appropriate method of dealing with economic problems
is the mathematical method and who derided the logical economists
as "literary" economists.
If this antagonism between the logical and the mathematical economists were merely a disagreement concerning the most adequate
procedure to be applied in the study of economics, it would be
superfluous to pay attention to it. The better method would prove
its preeminence by bringing about better results. It may also be that
different varieties of procedure are necessary for the solution of
different problems and that for some of them one method is more
useful than the other.
However, this is not a dispute about heuristic questions, but a controversy concerning the foundations of economics. The mathematical
method must be rejected not only on account of its barrenness. It is
an entirely vicious merhod, srarring from fake assumptions and ieading to fallacious inferences. Its syllogisms are not only sterile; they
divert the mind from the study of the real problems and distort the
relations between the various phenomena.
The ideas and procedures of the mathematical economists are not
uniform. There are three main currents of thought which must be
dealt with separately.
The first variety is represented by the statisticians who aim at
discovering economic laws from the study of economic experience.
I'hey aiin t o transform economics into a "quantitative" science. Their

program is condensed in the motto of the Econometric Society:
Science is measurement.
T h e fundamental error implied in this reasoning has been shown
above.i Experience of economic history is always experience of complex phenomena. It can never convey knowledge of the kind the
experimenter abstracts from a laboratory experiment. Statistics is a
method for the presentation of historical facts concerning prices
and other relevant data of human action. It is not economics and cannot produce economic theorems and theories. The statistics of prices
is economic history. T h e insight that, ceteris paribus, an increase
in demand must result in an increase in prices is not derived from
experience. Kobody ever was or ever will be in a position to observe a change in one of the market data ceteris paribus. There is
no such thing as quantitative economics. All economic quantities we
know about are data of economic history. N o reasonable man can
contend that the relations between price and supply is in general,
or in respect of certain commodities, constant. W e know, on the
contrary, that external phenomena affect different people in different ways, that the reactions of the same people to the same external
events vary, and that it is not possible to assign individuals to classes
of men reacting in the same way. This insight is a product of our
aprioristic theory. It is true the empiricists reject this theory; they
pretend that they aim to learn only frorn historical experience. However, they contradict their own principles as soon as they pass beyond the unadulterated recording of individual single prices and
begin to construct series and to compute averages. A datum of experience and a statistical fact is only a price paid at a definite time
and a definite place for a definite quantity of a certain commodity.
The arrangement of various price data in groups and the computation
of averages are guided by theoretical deliberations which are logically
and temporally antecedent. The extent to which certain attending
features and circumstantial contingencies of the price data concerned
are cake~ior not taken inco consideration depends on theoreticai
reasoning of the same kind. Nobody is so bold as to maintain that a
rise of a per cent in the supply of any commodity must always-in
every country and at any time-result in a fall of b per cent in its
price. But as no quantitative econon~istever ventured to define precisely on the ground of statistical experience the spcciaI conditions
producing a definite deviation from the ratio a : b, the futilitv of his
endeavors is manifest. Moreover, money is not a standard 'for the
nxasurcment of prices; it is a medium whose exchange ratio varies
7. Cf. above, pp. 31, 55-56,

Prices

349

in the same way, although as a rule not with the same speed and to
the same extent, in which the mutual exchange
- ratios of the vendible
commodities and services vary.
There is hardly any need to dwelI longer upon the exposure of the
claims of quantitative economics. In spite of all the high-sounding
pronouncements of its advocates, nothing has been done for the
realization of its program. The late Henry Schultz devoted his research to the measurement of elasticities of demand for various commodities. Professor Paul H. Douglas has praised the outcome of
Schultz's studies as "a work as necessary to help make economics
a more or less exact science as was the determination of atomic
weights f o r the development of chemistry." T h e truth is that Schultz
never embarked upon a determination of the elasticity of demand for
any commodity as such; the data he relied upon were limited to certain geographical areas and historical periods. His results for a definite
commodity, for instance potatoes, do not refer to potatoes in general,
but to potatoes in the United States in the years from 1875 to 1 9 2 9 . ~
They are, at best, rather questionable and unsatisfactory contributions
to various chapters of economic history. They are certainly not steps
toward the realization of the confused and contradictory program
of quantitative economics. It must be emphasized that the two other
varieties of mathematical economics are fully aware of the futility of
quantitative economics. For they have never ventured to make any
magnitudes as found by the econometricians enter into their formulas
and equations and thus to adapt them for the solution of particular
problems. There is in the field of human action no means of dealing
with future events other than that provided by understanding.
T h e second field treated by mathematical economists is that of the
rclation of prices and costs. In dealing with these problems the
mathematical economists disregard the operation of the market process
and moreover pretend to abstract from the use of money inherent
in all econonlic calculations. However, as they speak of prices and
costs in generai and confront prices and costs, they tacitiy impiy the
existence and the use of money. Prices are always money prices, and
costs cannot be taken into account in economic calculation if not
expressed in terms of money. If one does not resort to terms of money,
costs are expressed in complex quantities of diverse goods and services to he expended for the procurement of a product. On the other
hand prices-if this term is applicabIe a t all to exchange ratios deter8. Cf. Paul H . Douglas in Econometrics, VII, tor.
9. Cf. Henry Schultz, T h e Theory and Measurement of Demmnd (University
of Chicago Press, 19381, pp. 405-427,

3 50
Human Action
mined by barter-are the enumeration of quantities of various goods
against which the "seller" can exchange a definite supply. The goods
which are referred to in such "prices" are not the same to which the
"costs" refer. A comparison of such prices in kind and costs in kind
is not feasible. That the seller values the goods he gives away less than
those he receives in exchange for them, that the seller and the buyer
disagree with regard to the subjective valuation of the two goods
exchangcd, and that an entrepreneur embarks upon a project only
if he expects to receive for the product goods that he values higher
than those expended in their production, all this we know alreadv on
the ground of praxeological comprehension. It is this aprio;istic
know-ledge that enables us to anticipate the conduct of an entrepreneur who is in a position to resort to economic calculation. But the
~nathematicaleconomist deludes himself when he pretends to treat
thcsc problems in a more general way by omitting any reference to
terms of money. It is vain to investigate instances of nonperfect divisibility of factors of production without reference to economic calculation in terms of money. Such a scrutiny can never go beyond the
knowledge already available; namely tha; every entrepreneur is intent
upon producing those articles the sale of which will bring him proceeds that he values higher than the total complex of goods expended
in their production. But if there is no indirect exchange and if no medium of cxchange is in common use, he can succeed, provided he has
correctly anticipated the future state of the market, only if he is endowed with a superhuman intellect. H e would have to take in at a
glance all exchange ratios determined at the market in such a way as to
assign in his deliberations precisely the place due to every good according to these ratios.
It cannot be denied that all investigations concerning the relation
of prices and costs presuppose both the use of money and the market process. But the mathematical economists shut their eyes to this
obvious fact. They formulate equations and draw curves which are
supposed ro describe reaiiry. in fact they describe oniy a hypothetical
and unrealizablc state of affairs, in no way similar to the catallactic
problems in question. They substitute algebraic symbols for the determinate terms of money as used in economic calculation and believe
that this- procedure rcnders their reasoning more scientific. They
strongly impress the gullible layman. In fact they only confuse and
muddle things which are satisfactorily dealt with in textbooks of
commercial arithmetic and accountancy.
Some of thcsc mathematicians have gone so far as to declare that
economic calculation could be established on the basis of units of

Prices

351

utility. They call their methods utility analysis. Their error is shared
by the third variety of mathematical economics.
The characteristic mark of this third group is that they are openly
and consciously intent upon solving catallactic problems without
any reference to the market process. Their ideal is to construct an
economic theory according to the pattern of mechanics. They again
and again resort to analogies with classical mechanics which in their
opinion is the unique and absolute model of scientific inquiry. There
is no need to explain again why this analogy is superficial and misleading and in what respects purposive human action radically differs
from motion, the subject matter of mechanics. It is enough to stress
one point, viz., the practical significance of the differential equations
in both fields.
The deliberations which result in the formulation of an equation
are necessarily of a nonmathematical character. The formulation of
the equation is the consummation of our knowledge; it does not
directly enlarge our knowledge. Yet, in mechanics the equation can
render very important practical services. As there exist constant
relations between various mechanical elements and as these relations
can be ascertained by experiments, it becomes possible to use equations for the solution of definite technological problems. Our modern
industrial civilization is mainly an accomplishment of this utilization
of the differential equations of physics. No such constant relations
exist, however, between economic elements. T h e equations formulated by mathematical economics remain a useless piece of mental
gymnastics and would remain so even if they were to express much
more than they really do.
A sound economic deliberation must never forget these two fundamental principles of the theory of value: First, valuing that results in
action always means preferring and setting aside; it never means
equivalence. Second, there is no means of comparing the valuations
of different individuals or the valuations of the same individuals at
diEerent instants other than by estabiisiiing whether or not they arrange the alternatives in question in the same order of preference.
In the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy all
factors of production are employed in such a way that each of them
renders the most valuable service. No thinkable and possible change
could improve the state of satisfaction; no factor is employed for the
satisfaction of a need a if this employment prevents the satisfaction
of a need b that is considered more valuable than the satisfaction of
a. It is, of course, possible to describe this imaginary state of the
allocation of resources in differential equations and to visualize it

3 52

Human Action

graphically in curves. But such devices do not assert anything about
the market process. They mereIy mark out an imaginary situation in
which the market process would cease to operate. The mathematical
economists disregard the whole theoretical elucidation of the market
process and evasively amuse themselves with an auxiliary notion
employed in its context and devoid of any sense when used outside
of this context.
In physics we are faced with changes occurring in various sense
phenomena. W e discover a regularity in the sequence of these changes
and these observations lead us to the construction of a science of
physics. W e know nothing about the ultimate forces actuating these
changes. They are for the searching rnind ultimately given and defy
any further analysis. W h a t we know from observation is the regular
concatenation of various observable entities and attributes. I t is this
mutual interdependence of data that the physicist describes in differential equations.
In praxeology the first fact we know is that men are purposively
intent upon bringing about some changes. It is this Itnowled,<re that
integrates the subject matter of praxeology and differentiates it from
the subject matter of the natural sciences. W e know the forces behind
the changes, and this aprioristic knowledge leads us to a cognition of
the praxeological processes. T h e physicist does not know what
electricitv "is." I-Ic knows only phenomena attributed to something
called electricity. But the economist knows what actuates the market
process. It is only thanks to this ltnowlcdge that he is in a position to
distinguish market phenomena from other phenomena and to describe
the market process.
Now, the mathematical economists does not contribute anything
to the elucidation of the market process. H c mercly describes an
auxiliary makeshift employed by the logical economists as a limiting
notion, the definition of a state of affairs in which there is no longer
any action and the market process has come to a standstiI1. That is
all he can sav. -W-hat the iogicai economist sets forth in words when
defining the- imaginary constructions of the final state of rest and
the evenly rotating economy and what the mathematical economist
himself must describe in words before he embarks upon his mathematical work, is translated into algebraic symbols. A superficial analogy is spun out too long, that is alI.
Both the logical and the mathematical economists assert that human
action ultimately aims at the establishment of such a state of equilibrium and would reach it if all further changes in data were to cease.
But the logical economist knows much more than that. Me shows how

Prices

353

the activities of enterprising men, the promoters and speculators,
eager to profit from discrepancics in the price structure, tend toward
eradicating such discrepancies and thcreby also toward blotting out
the sources of entrepreneurial profit and loss. H e shows how this
process would finally result in the establishment of the cvenly rotating
economy. This is the task of economic theory. T h e mathematical
description of various states of equilibrium is mere play. The problem
is the analysis of the market process.
A comparison of both methods of economic analysis makes us
understand the meaning of the often raised request to enlarge the scope
of economic science by the construction of a dynamic theory instead
of the mcre occupation with static problems. With regard to logical
economics this postulate is devoid of any sense. Logical economics
is essentially a theory of processes and changes. I t resorts to the imaginary constructions of changelessness mcrely for the elucidation
of the phenomena of change. But it is different with mathematical
economics. Its equations and formula are limited to the description
of states of equilibrium and nonacting. It cannot assert anything with
rcgard to the formation of such states and their transformation into
other states as long as it remains in the realm of mathematical procedures. As against mathematical econon~icsthe request for a dynamic
theory is well substantiated. But there is no means for mathematical
economics to comply with this request. T h e problems of process
analysis, i.e., the only economic problems that matter, defy any
mathematical approach. T h e introduction of time parameters into the
equations is no solution. It does not even indicate the essential shortcomings of the mathematical method. T h e statements that every
change involves time and that change is always in thc temporal sequence are merely a way of expressing the fact that as far as there
is rigidity and unchangeability there is no time. The main deficiency
of mathematical economics is not the fact that it ignores thc temporal
sequence, but that it ignores the operation of the market process.
T h e mathematicai nlethod is at a ioss to show Row from a state
of nonequilibrium those actions spring up which tend toward the
cstablishmcnt of equilibrium. I t is, of course, possible to indicate the
mathematical operations required for the transformation of the
mathematical description of a definite state of nonequilibrium into
the ~nathematicaldescription of the state of equilibrium. But these
mathematical operations by no means describe the market process
actuated b y the discrepancies in the price structure. T h e differential
equations of mechanics are supposed to describe precisely the motions
concerned at any instant of the time traveled through. T h e economic

Human Action

3 54

equations have no reference whatever to conditions as they really are
in each instant of the time interval between the state of nonequilibrium and that of equilibrium. Only those entirely blinded by the
prepossession that economics must be a pale replica of mechanics
will underrate the weight of this objection. A very imperfect and
superficial metaphor is not a substitute for the services rendered by
logical economics.
In every chapter of catallactics the devastating consequences of
the mathematical treatment of economics can be tested. It is enough
to refer to two instances only. One is provided by the so-called
equation of exchange, the mathematical economists' futile and misleading attempt to deal with changes in the purchasing power of
money.1° The second can be best expressed in referring to Professor
Schumpeter's dictum according to which consumers in evaluating
consumers' goods "ipso facto also evaluate the means of production
which enter into the production of these goods." l1 It is hardly possible to construe the market process in a more erroneous way.
Economics is not about goods and services, it is about the actions
of living men. Its goal is not to dwell upon imaginary constructions
such as equilibrium. These constructions are only tools of reasoning. T h e sole task of economics is analysis of the actions of men, is the
analysis of processes.

6. Monopoly Prices
Competitive prices are the outcome of a complete adjustment of
the sellers to the demand of the consumers. Under the competitive
price the whole supply available is sold, and the specific factors of
production are employed to the extent permitted by the prices of
the nonspecific complementary factors. N o part of a supply available
is permanently withheld from the market, and the marginal unit of
specific factors of production employed does not yield any net
proceed. The whole economic process is conducted for the benefit
of the consumers. There is no conflict between the interests of the
buyers and those of the sellers, between the interests of the producers
and those of the consumers. The owners of the various commodities
are not in a position to divert consumption and production from the
lines enjoined by the state of supply of goods and services of all
orders and the state of technological knowledge.
p.

10. Cf. below,
396.
I I . Cf. Joseph A. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and

Democracy (New
York, 1942),p. 175. For a critique of this statement, cf. Hayek, "The Use of
Knowledge in Society," American Economic Review, X X X V , 5zp-5.30.

Prices

355

Every single seller would see his &vn proceeds increased if a fall
in the supply at the disposal of his competitors were to increase the
price at which he himself could sell his own supply. But on a competitive market he is not in a position to bring about this outcome.
Except for a privilege derived from government interference with
business he must submit to the state of the market as it is.
The entrepreneur in his entrepreneurial capacity is always subject
to the full supremacy of the consumers. It is different with the owners
of vendible goods and factors of production and, of course, with the
entrepreneurs in their capacity as owners of such goods and factors.
Under certain conditions they fare better by restricting supply and
selling it at a higher price per unit. The prices thus determined, the
monopoly prices, are an infringement of the supremacy of the consumers and the democracy of the market.
The special conditions and circumstances required for the enlergence of monopoly prices and their catallactic features are:
I . There must prevail a monopoly of supply. The whole s~zpplyof
the monopolized commodity is controlled by a single seller or a
group of sellers acting in concert. T h e monopolist-whether one
individual or a group of individuals-is in a position to restrict the
supply offcred for sale or enlployed for production in order to raise
the price per unit sold and need not fear that his plan will be fru! .
trated by interference on the part of other sellers of the same commodity.
2. Either the monopolist is not in a position to discriminate among
the buyers or he voluntarily abstains from such discrimination.12
3. he reaction of the buying public to the rise in prices bevond
the potential competitive price, the fall in demand, is not such-as to
render the proceeds resulting from total sales at any price exceeding
the competitive price smaller than total proceeds resulting from total
sales a t the competitive price. Hence it is superfluous to enter into
sophisticated disquisitions concerning what must be considered the
mark of the sameness of an article. It is not necessary to raise the question whether all neckties are to be called specimens of the same
article or whether one should distinguish them with regard to fabric,
color, and pattern. An academic delimitation of various articles is
useless. T h e only point that counts is the way in which the buvers
react to the rise in prices. For the theory of monopoly price -it is
irrelevant to observe that every necktie manufacturer turns out different artides and to call each of them a monopolist. Catallactics does
not deal with monopoly as such but with monopoly prices. A seller
x 2. Price discrimination is dealt with below, pp. 385-388.

356
Human Action
of neckties which arc different from those offered for sale b y other
people could attain monopoly prices only if the buyers did not react
to any rise in prices in such a way as to make such a rise disadvantageous for him.
itlonopoly is a prerequisite for the emergence of monopoly prices,
but it is not the only prerequisite. There is a further condition required, namely a certain shape of the demand curve. The mere existence of monopoly does not mean anything. T h e publisher of a copyright book is a monopolist. But he may not be able to sell a single
copy, no matter how low the price he asks. hTot every price at which
a monopolist sells a monopolized commodity is a monopoly price.
Monopoly prices are only prices at which it is more advantageous for
the monopolist to restrict the total amount to be sold than to expand
his sales to the limit which a competitive market would allow. They
are the outcome of a deliberate design tending toward a restriction of
trade.
Tn calling the monopolist's conduct deliberate, it is not meant to
suggest that he compares the monopoly price he is asking with the
competitive price which a hypothetical nonmonopolized market
would have determined. I t is only the economist who contrasts the
~nonopolyprice with the potential competitive price. Tn the dclibcrations of the monopolist who has already got his monopolistic position,
the competitive price plays no role at all. Like every other seller he
wants to realize the highest price attainable. I t is only the state of the
market as conditioned by his monopolistic position on the one hand
and the conduct of the buyers on the other that results in the emergence of monopoly prices.
4. I t is a fundamental mistake to assume that there is a third category of prices which are neither monopoly prices nor competitive
prices. If we disregard the problem of price discrimination to be
dealt with later, a definite price is either a competitive price or a
monopoly price. T h e assertions to the contrary are due to the erroneous belief that competition is not free or perfect unless everybody
is in a position to present himself as a seller of a definite commodity.
T h e available supply of every commodity is Iimited. If it were not
scarce with regard to the demand of the public, the thing in question
would not be considered an economic good, and no price would be
paid for it. I t is therefore misleading to apply the concept of monopoly
in such a way as to make it cover the entire field of economic goods.
Mere 1imitaGon of supply is thc source of economic value and of

Prices

357

all prices paid; as such it is not yet sufficient to generate monopoly
prices.13
The term monopolistic or imperfect competition is applied today
to the cases in which there are some differences in the products of
different producers and sellers. This means that almost all consumers'
goods are included in the class of monopolized goods. However, the
only question relevant in the study of the determination of prices is
whether these differences can be used by the seller for a scheme of
deliberate restriction of supply for the sake of increasing his total
net proceeds. Only if this is possible and put into effect, can monopoly
prices emerge as differentiated from competitive prices. It may be
true that every seller has a clientele which prefers his brand to those
of his competitors and would not stop buying it even if the price were
higher. But the problem for the seller is whether the number of such
people is great enough to overcompensate the reduction of totaI sales
which the abstention from buying on the part of other people would
bring about. Only if this is the case, can he consider the substitution
of monopoly prices for competitive prices advantageous.
The confusion which led to the idea of imperfect or monopolistic
competition stems from a misinterpretation of the term control of
supply. Every producer of every product has his share in controlling the supply of all commodities offered for sale. If he had
produced more a, he would have increased supply and brought about
a tendency toward a lower price. But the question is why he did not
produce more of a. Was he in restricting his production of a to the
amount of p intent upon complying to the best of his abilities with
the wishes of the consumers? Or was he intent upon defying the
orders of the consumers for his own advantage? In the first case he
did not produce more of a, because increasing the quantity of n beyond p would have withdrawn scarce factors of production from
other branches in which they would have been employed for the
satisfaction of more urgent needs of the consumers. He does not
r, hut mere!^ p, because such an increase w d d have
produse p
rendercd his business unprofitable or less profitable, while there are
still other more profitable employments available for capital investment. In the second case he did not produce r, because it was more
advantageous for him to leave a part of the available supply of a
monopolized specific factor of production m unused. If m were not
monopolized by him, it would have been impossible for him to ex-

+

r 3. Cf. the refutation of the misleading extension of the concept of monopoly

by Richard T. Ely, Alonopolies ~ n dTrusts (New York, 1906), pp. 1-36.

3 58
Human Action
pect any advantage from restricting his production of a. His competitors would have filled the gap and he would not have been in a
position to ask higher prices.
In dealing with monopoly prices we must always search for the
monopolized factor 7n. If no such factor is in the case, no monopoly
prices can emerge. The first requirement for monopoly prices is the
existence of a monopolized good. If no quantity of such a good nz is
withheld, there is no opportunity for an entrepreneur to substitute
monopoly prices for competitive prices.
Entrepreneurial profit has nothing at all to do with monopoly. If
an entrepreneur is in a position to sell at monopoly prices, he owes
this advantage to his monopoly with regard to a monopolized factor
m. H e earns the specific monopoly gain from his ownership of m,not
from his specific entrepreneurial activities.
Let us assume that an accident cuts a city's electrical supply for
several days and forces the residents to resort to candlelight only.
The price of candles rises to s; at this price the whole supply available is sold out. The stores selling candles reap a high profit i i selling
their whole supply at s. But it could happen that the storekeepers
combine in order to withhold a part of their stock from the market
and to sell the rest at a price s t. While s would have been the
competitive price, s t is a monopoly price. T h e surplus earned by
the storekeepers at the price s t over the proceeds they would have
earned when selling at s only is their specific monopoly gain.
It is immaterial in what way the storekeepers bring about the
restriction of the supply offered for sale. The physical destruction of
a part of the supply availabIe is the classical case of monopolistic
action. Only a short time ago it was practiced by the Brazilian government in burning large quantities of coffee. nut the same effect can be
attained by leaving a part of the supply unused.
While there constantly prevails a tendency to make profits disappear, the specific monopoly gain is a permanent phenomenon and
can disappear only with a change in the market data. While profits
are incompatible with the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy, monopoly prices and specific monopoly gains are not.
5. The competitive price is determined by the state of the market.
There prevails on a competitive market a tendency toward the disappearance of differences in prices and the establishment of a uniform
price. With regard to monopoly prices things are different. If it is
possible for the seller to increase his net proceeds by restricting sales
and increasing prices per unit sold, then as a rule there are several
monopoly prices which satisfy this condition. As a rule one of these

+

-+

+

Prices

3 59

monopoly prices yields the highest net proceeds. But it may also
happen that various monopoly prices are equally advantageous to
the monopolist. W e may call this monopoly price or these monopoly
prices most advantageous to the monopolist the optimum ~nonopoly
price or the optimum monopoly prices.
6. The monopolist does not know beforehand in what way the consumers will react to a rise in prices. Hc must resort to trial and error
in his endeavors to find out whether the monopolizcd good can be
sold to his advantage at any price exceeding the competitive price
and, if this is so, which of various possible monopoly prices is the
optimum monopoly price or one of the optimum rnonopoly prices.
This is in practice much more difficult than the economist assumes
when, in drawing demand curves, he ascribes perfect foresight to the
monopolist. W e must therefore list as a special condition required for
the appearance of monopoly priccs the monopolist's abiIity to discover such prices.
7. A special case is provided by the incomplete monopoly. The
grcater part of the totaI supply available is owned by the n ~ o n b ~ o ~ i s t ;
the rest is owned by one or several men who are not prepared to cooperate with the monopolist in a scheme for restricting sales and
bringing about monopoly priccs. However, the reluctance of these
outsiders does not prevent the establishment of monopoly prices if
the portion p, controlled by the monopolist is large enough when compared with the sum of the outsiders' portions p,. Let us assume that
p,) can be sold at the price c per unit and
the whole supply ( p = p,
a supply of p - z at the monopoly price d. If d ( p , - z ) is higher
than c p,, it is to the advantage of the monopolist to embark upon a
lnonopolistic restriction of his sales, no matter what the conduct of the
outsiders may be. They may go on selling at the price c or they may
raise their p k e s up to the maximum of d. The only point that counts
is that the outsiders are not willing to put up with a reduction in the
quantity which they themselves are selling. The whole reduction required must be borne by the owner of p,. This influences his plans
and will as a rule result in the emergence of a monopoly price which
is different from that which would have been established under complete monopoly.14
8. Duopoly and oIigopoly are not special varieties of monopoly
prices, but merely a variety of the methods applied for the establishment of a rnonopoly price. Two or several men own the whole supply.
They all are prepared to sell at monopoly prices and to restrict their

+

14. It is obvious that an incomplete nionopolp scheme is bound to collapse if
the outsiders come into a position to expand their sales.

360
Hu7;1zan Action
total sales accordingly. But for some reason they do not want to act
in concert. Each of them goes his own way without any formal or
tacit agreement with his competitors. But each of them knows also
that his rivals are intent upon R monopolistic restriction of their sales
in order to reap higher prices per unit and specific monopoly gains.
Each of thcm watches carefully the conduct of his rivals and tries
to adjust his own plans to their actions. A succession of moves and
countermoves, a mutual outwitting results, the outcome of which
depends on the personal cunning of the adverse parties. The duopolists
and oligopolists have two objectives in mind: to find out the monopoly
price most advantageous to the sellers on the one hand and to shift
as much as possible of the burden of restricting the amount of sales
to their rivals. Precisely because they do not agree with regard to the
quotas of the reduced amount of sales to be allotted to each party,
they do not act in concert as the members of a cartel do.
One must not confuse duopoly and oligopoly with the incomplete
monopoly or with competition aiming at the establishment of monopoly. In thc case of incon~pletemonopoly only the monopolistic group
is prepared to restrict its sales in ordcr to make a monopoly pricc prevail; the other sellers decline to restrict their sales. But duopolists and
oligopolists are rcady to withhold a part of their supply from the market. In the case of pricc dashing one group A plans to attain fuII monopoly or incomplete monopoly by forcing all or most of its competitors, the B's, to go out of business. It cuts prices to a level which
makes selling ruinous to its morc vulnerable competitors. A mav also
incur losses by selling at this low rate; but it is in a position to unhergo
such losses for a longer time than the others and it is confident that
it will make good for them later by ample monopoly gains. This
process has nothing to do with monopoly prices. It is a scheme for the
attainment of a monopoly position.
One may wonder whether duopoly and oligopoly are of practical
significance. As a rule the parties concerned will come to at least
a tacit understanding concerning their quotas of the reduced amount
of sales.
9. The monopolized good by whose partial withholding from the
market the monopoly prices are made to prevail can be either a good
of the lowest order or a good of a higher order, a factor of production.
It may consist in the control of the technological knowledge required
for production, the "recipe." Such recipes are as a rule free goods as
their ability to produce definite effects is unlimited. They can become
economic goods only if they are monopolized and their use is restricted. Any pricc paid for the services rendered by a recipe is al-

Prices

361

ways a monopoIy price. It is immaterial whether the restriction of a
recipe's use is made possible by institutional conditions-such as
patents and copyright laws-or by the fact that a formula is kept
secret and other people fail to guess it.
The complementary factor of production the monopolization of
which can result in the establishment of monopoly prices may also
consist in a man's opportunity to make his cooperation in the production of a good ltnown to consumers who attribute to this cooperation
a special significance. This opportunity may be given either by the
nature of the commodities or services in question or by institutional
provisions such as protection of trademarks. The reasons why the
consumers value the contribution of a man or a firm so highly are
manifold. They may be: special confidence placed on the individual
or firm concerned on account of previous experience; l 5 merely baseless prejudice or error; snobbishness; magic or metaphysical prepossessions whose groundlessness is ridiculed by more reasonable
people. A drug marked by a trade-mark may not differ in its chemical
structure and its physiological efficacy from other compounds not
marked with the same label. However, if the buyers attach a special
significance to this label and are ready to pay higher prices for the
product marked with it, the seller can, provided the configuration of
demand is propitious, reap monopoly prices.
The monopoly which enables the monopolist to restrict the amount
offered without counteraction on the part of other people can consist
in the greater productivity of a factor which he has at his disposal as
against the lower productivity of the corresponding factor at the
disposal of his potential con~petitors.If the margin between the
higher productivity of his supply of the monopolized factor and that
of his potential competitors is broad enough for the emergence of a
monopoly price, a situation results which we may call margin monop01y.~"
Let us illustrate margin monopoly by referring to its most frequent instance in present-day conditions, the power of a protective
tariff to generate a monopoly price under special circumstances.
Atlantis puts a tariff t on the importation of each unit of the commodity p the world market price of which is s. If domestic consumption of p in Atlantis at the price s $ t is a and domestic production of
p is b, b being smaller than a, then the costs of the ~narginaldealer are
15. Cf. below, pp. 3 7 6 3 8 0 , on good will.
16. The use of this term "margin monopoly" is, like that of any other, quite
optional. It would be vain to object that every other monopoly which results in
monopoly prices could also be called a margin monopoly.

Human Action

362

+ t. The domestic plants are in a position to sell their total output at
the price s + t. The tariff is effective and offers to domestic business

s

the incentive to expand the prod~~ction
of p frorn b to a quantity
slightly smaller than a. But if b is greater than a, things are different.
If we assume that h is so large that even at the price s domestic consumption lags behind it and the surplus must be exported and sold
abroad, the imposition of a tariff does not affect the price of p. Both
the domestic and the world market price of p remain unchanged.
However the tariff, in discriminating between domestic and foreign
production of p, accords to the domestic plants a privilege which
can be used for a monopolistic combine, provided certain further
conditions are present. If it is possible to find within the margin between s t and s a monopoly price, it becomes lucrative for the
domestic enterprises to form a cartel. The cartel sells in the home
market of Atlantis at a monopoly price and disposes of the surpluz
abroad at the world market price. Of course, as the quantity of p
offered at the world market increases as a consequence of ;he restriction of the quantity sold in Atlantis, the world market price drops
from s to s,. It is therefore a further requirement for the emergence
of the domestic monopoly price that the total restriction in proceeds
resulting from this fa11 in the world market price is not so great as
to absorb the whole monopoly gain of the domestic cartel.
In the long run such a national cartel cannot preserve its monopolistic position if entrance into its branch of production is free to
newcomers. The monopolized factor the services of which the cartel
restricts (as far as the domestic market is concerned) for the sake of
monopoly prices is a geographical condition which can easily be
duplicated by every new investor who establishes a new plant within
the borders of Atlantis. Under modern industrial conditions, thc
characteristic feature of which is steady technological progress, the
latest plant will as a rule be more efficient than the older plants and
produce at lower average costs. The incentive to prospective newcomers is therefore twofoid. it consists not oniy in the monopoiy gain
of the cartel members, but also in the possibility of outstripping
them by lower costs of production.
Here again institutions come to the aid of the old firms that form
the cartel. The patents give them a legal monopoly which nobody
may infringe. Of course, only some of their production processes
may be protected by patents. But a competitor who is prevented
from resorting to these processes and to the production of the articles
concerned may be handicapped in such a serious way that he cannot
consider entrance into the field of the cartelized industry.

+

Prices

363

The owner of a patent enjoys a legal monopoly which, other conditions being propitious, can be used for the attainment of monopoly
prices. Beyond the field covered by the patent itself a patent may
render auxiliary services in the establishment and preservation of margin monopoly where the primary institutional conditions for the emergence of such a monopoly prevail.
W e may assume that some world cartels would exist even in the
absence o'f any government interference which provides for other
commodities the indispensable conditions required for the construction of a monopolistic combine. There are some commodities, e.g.,
diamonds and mercury, the supply of which is by nature limited to
a few sources. T h e owners of these resources can easily be united for
concerted action. But such cartels would play only a minor role in
the setting of world production. Their economic significance would
be rather small. The important place that cartels occupy in our time
is an outcome of the interventionist policies adopted by the governments of all countries. The great monopoly problem mankind has to
face today is not an outgrowth of the operation of the market economy. It is a product of purposive action on the part of governments.
It is not one of the evils inherent in capitalism as the demagogues
trumpet. It is, on the contrary, the fruit of policies hostile to capitalism
and intent upon sabotaging and destroying its operation.
The classical country of the cartels was Germany. In the last dccadcs
of the nineteenth century the German Reich embarked upon a vast
scheme of Sozialpolitik. T h e idea was to raise the income and the
standard of living of the wage-earners by various measures of what
is called prolabor legislation, by the much glorified Bismarck plan of
social security, and by labor-union pressure and compulsion for the
attainment of higher wage rates. The advocates of this policy defied
thc warnings of the economists. There is no such thing as economic
law, they announced. The HohenzolIern Empire which had defeated
the Emperors of Austria and of France and before which the nations
of the world trembled was above any law. Its will was the supreme
canon.
In stark reality the Sozialpolitik raised costs of production within
Germany. Every progress of the alleged prolabor legislation and
every successful strike disarranged industrial conditions to the disadvakage of the German enterprises. It made it harder for them to
outdo foreign competitors for whom the domestic events of Germany
did not raise costs of production. If the Germans had been in a position to renounce the export of manufactures and to produce only for
the domestic market, the tariff could have sheltered the German

364
Human Action
plants against the intensified competition of foreign business. They
wouId have been in a position to reap higher prices. What the wage
earner would have profited from the achievements of the legislature
and the unions, would have been absorbed by the higher prices he
would have had to pay for the articles he bought. Real wage rates
would have risen only to the extent the entrepreneurs could improve
technological procedures and thereby increase the productivity of
labor. The tariff would have rendered the Sozialpolitik harmless in
preventing a spread of unemployment.
But Germany is, and was already at the time Bismarck inaugurated
his prolabor policy, a predominantly industrial country. Its plants
exported a considerable part of their total output. These exports
enabled the Germans to import the foodstuffs and raw materials
they could not grow in their own country, comparatively overpopulated and poorly endowed with natural resources as it was. As
has been pointed out above, such a surplus production renders a
protective tariff ineffective. Only cartels could free Germany from
the catastrophic consequences of its "progressive" prolabor policies.
The cartels charged monopoly prices at home and sold abroad at
cheaper prices. The cartels are the necessary accompaniment and
upshot of a "progressive" labor policy as far as it affects industries
dependent on foreign markets. The carteIs do not, of course, safeguard for the wage earners the illusory social gains which the labor
politicians and the union leaders
them. There is no means
of raising wage rates for all those eager to earn wages above the
height determined by the productivity of each kind of labor. What
the cartels achieved was merely to counterbalance the apparent
gains in nominal wage rates b y corresponding increases in domestic
commodity prices. But the most disastrous effect of minimum wage
rates, permanent mass unemployment, was at first avoided.
Germany was not the first country that resorted to "prolabor" legislation and gave its labor unions a free hand to enforce rninimum wage
rates. Other countries had preceded Germany in this respect. it
the oppositon w-hich these policies had encountered on the part of
economists, reasonable statesmen, and businessmen had for many
years put a check upon the progress of these destructive methods of
goternment. For the most part their alleged benefits did not ..
grant
the wage earners more than they had already won, without any interference on the part of the government, by the technological improvements which never cease under capitalism. When in some cases the
government had gone a little farther, the propulsive evolution of
business in a very short time ~nadethings even. Rut in later years,

Prices

365

especially after the end of the first World War, all other nations
adopted for their labor poIicies the thorough methods of the Germans.
Again the cartel had to supplement the "prolabor" policies in order
to conceal their futility and to postpone for a time their manifest
fiasco.
With all industries which cannot content themselves with the
domestic markct and are intent upon selling a part of their output
abroad the function of the tariff, in this age of government interference with business, is to enable the establishment of domestic monopoly prices. Whatever the purpose and the effects of tariffs may
have been in the past, as soon as an exporting country embarks upon
measures designed to increase the re~venuesof the wage earners or the
farmers above the potential market rates, it must foster schemes which
result in domestic nlonopoly prices for the comn~oditiesconcerned.
A national government's might is Iimited to the territory subject to its
sovereignty. It has the power to raise domestic costs of production.
I t does not have the,power to force foreigners to pay correspondingly
higher prices for the products. If exports are not to be discontinued,
they must be subsidized. The subsidy can be paid openly by the
treasury or its burden can be imposed upon the consumers by the
cartel's monopoly prices.
The advocates of government interference with business ascribe to
the "State" the power to benefit certain groups within the framework
of the market by a mere fiat. In fact this power is the government's
power to foster monopolistic combines. The monopoly gains are the
funds out of which the "social gains" are financed. As far as these
monopoly gains do not suffice, the various measures of interventionism immediately paralyze the operation of the market; mass unemployment, depression, and capital consumption appear. This explains
the eagerness of all contemporary governments to foster monopoly
in all those sectors of the market which are in some way or other
connected with export trade.
If a government does not or cannot succeed in attaining its monopoIistic aims indirectly, it resorts to direct action. In the field of
coal and potash the Imperial Government of Germany established
compulsory cartels. The American New Deal was prevented by the
opposition of business from organking the nation's great industries
on an obligatory carte1 basis. It succeeded better in some vital branches
of farming with measures designed to restrict output for the sake
of monopoly prices. A long series of agreements concluded between
the world's most prominent governments aimed at the establishment
of world-market monopoly prices for various raw materials and food-

366
Human Action
stuffs.17It is the avowed purpose of the United Nations to continue
these plans.
It is necessary to view this promonopoly policy of the contemporary governments as a uniform phenomenon in order to discern the
reasons which motivated it. From the catalIactic point of view these
monopolies are not uniform. The contractual cartels into which entrepreneurs enter in taking advantage of the incentive offered by protective tariffs are instances of margin monopoly. Where the government directly fosters monopoly prices we are faced with instances of
license monopoly. The factor of production by the restriction of the
use of which the monopoly price is brought about is the license
which the laws make a requisite for supplying the consumers.
Such licenses may be granted in different ways:
(a) An unlimited license is granted to practically every applicant.
This amounts to a state of affairs under which no license at all is required.
(b) Licenses are granted only to selected applicants. Competition
is restricted. However, monopoly prices can emerge only if the
licensees act in concert and the configuration of demand is propitious.
(c) There is only one licensee. The licensee, e.g:, the holder of
a patent or a copyright, is a monopolist. If the configuration of the
demand is propitious and if the licensee wants to reap monopoly pins,
he can ask monopoly prices.
(d) The licenses granted are limited. They confer upon the licensee
only the right to produce or to sell a definite quantity, in order to
prevent him from disarranging the authority's schen~e.The authority
itself directs the establishment of monopoly prices.
Finally there arc thc instances in which a government estabIishes a
monopoly for fiscaI purposes. The monopoly gains go to the treasury. Many European governments have instituted tobacco monopolies. Others have monopolized salt, matches, telegraph and telephone
service, broadcasting, and so on. Without exception every country
has a government n~onopolyof the postal service.
10.Margin monopoly need not always owe its appearance to an
institutional factor such as tariffs. It can also be produced by sufficient
differences in the fertility or productivity of some factors of production.
It has already been said that it is a serious blunder to speak of a land
monopoly and to rcfer to monopoly prices and monopoly gains in
17. A collection of these agreements was published in 1943 by the International
Labor Office under the title intergovernmental C o m o d i t y Control Agreements.

Prices

367

explaining the prices of agricultural products and the rent of land.
As far as history is confronted with instances of monopoly prices
for agricultural products, it was license monopoly fostered by government decree. However the acknowledgment of these facts does not
mean that differences in the fertility of the soil could never bring about
monopoly prices. If the difference'between the fertility of the poorest
soil still tilled and the richest fallow fields available for an expansion
of production were so great as to enable the owners of the already
exploited soil to find an advantageous monopoly price within this
margin, they could consider restricting production by concerted
action in order to reap monopoly prices. But it is a fact that physical
conditions in agriculture do not comply with these requirements.
It is precisely on account of this fact that farmers longing for monopoly prices do not resort to spontaneous action but ask for the interference of governments.
In various branches of mining conditions are often more propitious
for the emergence of monopoly prices based on margin monopoly.
r I. It has been asserted again and again that the economies of bigscale production have generated a tendency toward monopoly prices
in the processing industries. Such a monopoly would be called in our
terminology a margin monopoly.
Before entering into a discussion of this topic one must clarifv the
role an increase or decrease in the unit's average cost of production
plays in the considerations of a monopolist searching for the most
advantageous monopoly price. W e consider a case in which the owner
of a monopolized complementary factor of production, e.g., a patent,
at the same time manufactures the product p. If the average cost of
production of one unit of p, without any regard to the patent, decreases with the increase in the quantity produced, the monopolist
must weigh this against the gains expected from the restriction of
output. If on the other hand cost of production per unit decreases
with the restriction of total production, the incentive to embark upon
monopolistic restraint is augmented. It is obvious that the mere fact
that big-scale production tends as a nile to lower average costs of
production is in itself not a factor driving toward the emergence
of monopoly prices. It is rather a checking factor.
What those who blame the economies of big-scale production for
the spread of monopoly prices are trying to say is that the higher
efficiency of big-scale production makes it difficult or even impossible
for small-scale plants to compete successfuIly. A big-scale plant could,
they believe, resort to monopoly prices with impunity because small
business is not in a position to challenge its monopoly. Now, it is cer-

Human Action

368

tainly true that in many branches of the processing industries it would
be foolish to enter the market with the high-cost products of smal1,
inadequate plants. A modern cotton mill does not need to fear the
competition of old-fashioned distaffs; its rivals are other more or less
adequately equipped mills. But this does not mean that it enjoys the
opportunity of selling at monopoly prices. There is competition
between big businesses too. If monopoly prices prevail in the sale of
the products of big-size business, the reasons arc either patents or
monopoly in thc ownership of mines or other sources of raw material
or cartels based on tariffs.
One must not confuse the notions of n~onopolyand of monopoly
prices. Merc monopoly as such is catallactically of no importance if
it does not result in monopoly prices. Monopoly prices are consequential only because they are the outcome of a conduct of business
defying the supremacy of the consumers and substituting the private
interests of the monopoIist for those of thc public. They are the only
instance in the operation of a market economy in which the distinction between production for profit and production for use could to
some extent be made if one were prepared to disregard the fact that
monopoly gains have nothing at all to do with profits proper. They
are not a part of what catallactics can call profits; they are an increase
in the price earned from the sale of the services rendered by some
factors of production, some of these factors being physical factors,
some of them merely institutional. If the entrepreneurs and capitalists
in the absence of a monopoly price constellation abstain from expanding production in a certain branch of industry because the opportunities offered to them in other branches are more attractive, they
do not act in defiance of the wants of the consumers. On the contrary,
they follow precisely the line indicated by the denland as expressed
on the market.
T h e political bias which has obfuscated the discussion of the monopoly problem has neglected to pay attention to the essential issues
;-x~nl--J.
1- A-ol;-m
of mmopo!y 9rices
ane mnsc
UWllllS ~ x A t h
J
first of all raise the question of what obstacles restram people from
challcnging the monopoIists. In answering this question one discovers
the role played in the emergence of monopoly prices by institutional
factors. It is nonsense to spcak of conspiracy with regard to the
deals between American firms and German cartels. If an American
wanted to manufacture an article protected by a patent owned by
Germans, he was compelled by the American law to come to an arrangement with German business.
I 2 . A special case is what may be called the failure monopoly.
~T-OYTT

IIIVIIIVCLL

111

V"1L1.

U "r l

---POCP

Prices
In the past capitalists invested funds in a plant designed for the
production of the article p. Later events proved the investment ;I
failure, T h e prices which can be obtained in selling p are so low that
the capital invested in the plant's inconvertible equipment does not
yield a return. It is lost. However, these prices arc high enough to
yield a reasonable return for the variable capital to be employed for
the current production of p. If the irrevocable loss of the capital invested in the inconvertible equipment is written off on the books and
all corresponding alterations arc made in the accounts, the reduced
capital working in the conduct of the business is by and large so
profitable that it wouId be a new mistake to stop production altogether. T h e plant works at full capacity producing the quantity q of p
and selling the unit at the price s.
But conditions may be such that it is possible for the enterprise
to reap a monopoly gain by restricting output to q / 2 and selling the
unit of p at the price 3 s. Then the capital invested in the inconvertible
equipment no longer appears completely lost. It yields a modest return, namely, the monopoly gain.
This enterprise now sells at monopoly prices and reaps monopoly
gains although the total capital invested yields little when compared
with what the investors would have earked if they had invested in
other lines of business. The enterprise withholds from the market
the services which the unused production capacity of its durable
equipment could render and fares better than it would by producing
at full capacity. It defies the order3 of the public. T h e public would
have been in better position if the investors had avoided the mistake
of immobilizing a part of their capital in the production of p. They
would, of course, not get any p. But they would instead obtain those
articles which they miss now because the capital required for their
production has been wasted in the construction of an aggregate for
the production of p. However, as things are now after this irreparable
fault has been committed, the%.want to get more of p and are ready
t o pay for it what is now its potential competitive market price,
namely, s. They do not approve, as conditions are now, the action of
the enterprise in withholding an amount of variable capital from
employment for the production of p. This amount certainly does not
remain unused. It goes into other lines of business and produces there
something else, namely. m. But as conditions are now, the consumers
would prcfer an increase of thc available quantity of p to an increase
in the available quantity of 727. T h e proof is that inthe absence of a monopoIistic restriction of the capacity for the production of p, as it is
under given conditions, the profitability of a production of the quan-

Human Action

370

tity q of s would be such that it would pay better than an increase in the
quantity of the article 7n produced.
There arc two distinctive features of this case. First, the monopoly
prices paid by the buyers are still lower than the total cost of production of p would be if full account is taken of the whole input of the
investors. Second, the monopoly gains of the firm are so small that
they do not make the total venture appear a good investment. It remains malinvestment. It is precisely this fact: that constitutes the monopolistic position of the firm. N o outsider wants to enter its field of
entrepreneurial activity because the production of p results in losses.
Failure monopoly is by no means a merely academic construction.
It is, for instance, actual today in the case of some railroad companies.
But one must guard against the mistake of interpreting every instance
of unused production capacity as a failure monopoly. Even in the
absence of monopoly it may be more profitable to employ variable
capital for other purposes instead of expanding a firm's production
to the limit fixed by the capacity of its durable inconvertible equipment; then the output restriction complies precisely with the state
of the competitive market and the wishes of the public.
13. Local monopolies are, as a rule, of institutional origin. But
there are also local monopolies which originate out of conditions of the
unhampered market. Often the institutional monopoly is designed to
deaI with a monopoly which came into existence or would be likely to
come into existence without any authoritarian interference with the
market.
A catallactic classification of local monopolies must distinguish
three groups: margin monopoIy, limited-space monopoly and license
monopoly.
A local margin monopoly is characterized by the fact that the barricr
preventing outsiders from competing on the local market and breaking the monopoly of the local sellers is the comparative height of
transportation costs. S o tariffs are needed to grant limited protection
c,
-..,L' 1. u Iw u a a!! +La
4-r
LU a f i l u ~W L I ~ C L
1
the production of bricks against the competition of far distant tile
works. The costs of transportation provide them with a margin in
which, the configuration of demand being propitious, an advantageous
monopob price can be found.
So far'local margin monopolies do not differ catallactically from
other instances of margin monopoly. What distinguishes them and
makes it necessary to deal with them in a special way is their relation
to the rent of urban land on the one hand and their relation to city
development on the other.
-7.7-.-

u 1 L

n
:fin,,+
a d j a & C u L

,n+r7m
I m L u l a !

rnrnrrn.nr
lCauLLLLC.7

rn".l;ma
1C.t U I L L u

Prices

371

Let us assume that an area A offering favorable conditions for the
aggregation of an increasing urban population is subject to monopoly
prices for building materials. Consequently building costs are higher
than they would be in the absence of such a monopoly. But there is
no reason for those weighing the pros and cons of choosing the location of their homes and their workshops in A to pay higher prices for
the purchase or the renting of such houses and workshops. These
prices are determined on the one hand hy the corresponding prices in
other areas and on the other by the advantages which settling in A
offers when compared with settling somewhere else. The higher expenditure required for construction does not affect these prices;
its incidence falls upon the yield of land. T h e burden of the monopoly gains of the sellers of building materials falls on the owners of
the urban soil. These gains absorb proceeds which in their absence
would go to these owners. Even in the-not very likely-case that
the demand for houses and workshops is such as to make it possible for
the owners of the land to attain monopoly prices in selling and leasing,
the monopoIy prices of the building materials would affect only the
proceeds of the landowners, not the prices to be paid by the buyers or
tenants.
The fact that the burden of the monopoly gains reverts to the price
of urban employment of the land does not mean that it does not
check the growth of the city. It postpones the employment of the
peripheral land for the expansion of the urban settlement. T h e instant
at which it becomes advantageous for the owner of a piece of suburban
land to withdraw it from agricultural or other nonurban employment and to use it for urban development appears at a later date.
Now arresting a city's development is a two-edged action. Its
usefulness for the monopolist is ambiguous. H e cannot know whether
future conditions will be such as to attract more people to A, the only
market for his products. One of the attractions a city offers to newcomers is its bigness, the multitude of its population. Industry and
commerce tend toward centers. If the monopolist's action delays the
growth of the urban community, it may direct the stream toward
other places. An opportunity may be missed which never comes back.
Greater proceeds in the future may be sacrificed to comparatively
small short-run gains.
It is therefore at least questionable whether the owner of a local
margin monopoly in the long run serves his own interests well by
embarking upon selling at monopoly prices. It would oftcn bc more
advantageous for him to discriminate between the various buyers. He
could sell at higher prices for construction projects in the central

372

Human Action

parts of the city and at lower prices for such projects in peripheral
districts. The range of local margin monopoly is more restricted than
is generally assumed.
Limited-space mompoly is the outcome of the fact that physical
conditions restrict the field of opcration in such a way that only one
or a few enterprises can enter it. Monopoly emerges when there is
only one enterprise in the field or when the few operating enterprises combine for concerted action.
It is sometimes possible for two competing trolley companies to
operate in the same streets of a city. There were instances in which
two or even more companies shared in supplying the residents of
an area with gas, electricity, and telephone service. But even in such
exceptional cases there is hardly any real competition. Conditions
suggest to the rivals that they combine at least tacitly. The narrowness of the space results, one way or another, in monopoly.
In practice limited-space monopoly is closely connected with
license monopoly. It is practically impossible to enter the field without an understanding with the local authorities controlling the streets
and their subsoil. Even in the absence of laws requiring a franchise
for the establishment of public utility services, it would be necessary
for the enterprises to come to an agreement with the municipal
authorities. Whether or not such agreements are to be lcgally described as franchises is unimportant.
Monopoly, of course, need not result in monopoly prices. It depends on the special data of each case whether or not a monopolistic
public utility company could resort to monopoly prices. But there
are certainly cases in which it can. It may be that the company is
ill-advised in choosing a monopoly-price policy and that it would better serve its long-run interests by lower prices. But there is no
guarantee that a monopolist will find out what is most advantageous
for him.
One must realize that limited-space monopoly may often result in
monopoly prices. In this case we are confronted with a situation in
which the market process does not accomplish its democratic function.18
Private enterprise is very unpopular with our contemporaries. Private ownership of the means of production is especially disliked in
those fields in which limited-space n~onopolyemerges even if the
company does not charge monopoly prices and even if its business
yields only small profits or results in losses. A "public utility" company is in the eyes of the interventionist and socialist pcjli&ians a
18. About the significance of this fact see below, pp. 6 7 6 6 7 8 .

Prices
public enemy. The voters approve of any evil inflicted upon it by
the authorities. It is generally assumed that these enterprises shouid
be nationalized or municipalized. Monopoly gains, it is said, must
never go to private citizens. They should go to the public funds exclusiveIy.
The outcome of the municipalization and nationalization policies
of the last decades was almost without exception financial failare,
poor service, and political corruption. Blinded by their anticapitalistic prejudices people condone poor service and corruption and for
a long time did not bother about the financial failure. However, this
failure is one of the factors which contributed to the emergence of
the present-day crisis of interventionism,'"
14. It is customary to characterize traditional labor-union policies
as monopolistic schemes aiming at the substitution of monopoly wage
rates for competitive wage rates. However, as a rule labor unions do
not aim at monopoly wage rates. A union is intent upon restricting
competition on its own sector of the labor market in order to raise
its wage rates. But restriction of competition and monopoly price
policy must not be confused. The characteristic feature of monopoly
prices is the fact that the sale of only a part p of the total supply P
available nets higher proceeds than the sale of P. T h e monopolist earns
a monopoly gain by withholding P - p from the market. It is not
the height of this gain that marks the monopoly price situation as
such, but the purposive action of the monopolists in bringing it about.
T h e monopolist is concerned with the employment of the whole
stock available. He is equally interested in every fraction of this
stock. Tf a part of it remains unused, it is his loss. Xonetheless he
chooses to have a part unused because under the prevailing configuration of demand it is more advantageous for him to proceed in this
way. It is the peculiar state of the market that motivates his decision.
The monopoly which is one of the two indispensable conditions of
the emergence of monopoly prices may be-and is as a rule-the
product of an institutional interference with the market data. But these
external forces do not directly result in nlonopoly prices. Only if a
second req~iirementis fulfilled is the opportunity for monopolistic
action set.
It is different in the case of simple supply restriction. Here the
authors of the restriction are not concerned with what may happen
to the part of the supply they bar from access to the market. The fate
of the people who own this part does not matter to them. They are
looking only at that part of the supply which remains on the market,
rg. See below, pp. 851-853.

3 74

Human Action

.Monopolistic action is advantageous for the monopolist only if total
net proceeds at a monopoly price exceed total net proceeds at the
potential competitive price. Restrictive action is always advantageous
for the privileged group and disadvantageous for those whom it excludes from the market. It always raises the price per unit and therefore the total net proceeds of the privileged group. The losses of the
excluded group are not taken into account.
It may happen that the benefits which the privileged group derives
from the restriction of competition are much more lucrative for them
than any imaginable monopoly price policy could be. But this is another question. It does not blot out the catallactic differences between
these two modes of action.
T h e prevailing labor-union policies are restrictive and not n ~ o nopoly price policics. The unions are intent upon restricting the supply of labor in their field without bothering about the fare o f those
cxcluded. They have succeeded in cvery comparativeIy underpopulated country in erecting immigration barriers. Thus they preserve
their comparatively high wage rates. The excluded foreign workers
are forced to stay in their countries in which the marginal productivity of labor, and consequently wage rates, are lower. The tendency
toward an equalization of wage rates which prevails under free
mobility of labor from country to country is paralyzed. On the domestic market the unions do not tolerate the competition of nonunionized
workers and admit only a restricted number to union membership.
Those not admitted must go into less remunerative jobs or must remain unemployed. The unions are not interested in the fate of thcse
people.
Even if a union takes ovcr the responsibility for its unemployed
mcmbers and pays them, out of the contributions of its employed
members, unemployment doles not lower than the earnings of the
employed members, its action is not a monopoly price policy. For
the unemployed union members are not the only people wronged
by the union's policy of substituting higher rates for the potential
lower market rates. The interests of those excluded from membership are not taken into account.

T h e Mathematical Treatment of the Theory of Monopoly Prices
Mathematical economists have paid special attention to the theory of
monopoly prices. It looks as if monopoly prices would be a chapter of
catallactics for which mathematical treatment is more appropriate than it
is for other chapters of catallactics. However, the services which mathematics can render in this field are rather poor too.

Prices

375

With regard to competitive prices mathematics cannot give more than a
mathematical description of various states of equilibrium and of conditions
in the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy. It cannot
say anything about the actions which would finally establish these equilibria and this evenly rotating system if no further changes in the data were
to occur.
In the theory of monopoly prices mathematics comes a little nearer to
the reality of action. It shows how the monopolist could find out the
optimum monopoly price provided he had at his disposal all the data required. But the monopolist does not know the shape of the curve of demand. What he knows is only points at which the curves of demand and
supply intersected one another in the past. He is therefore not in a position
to make use of the mathematical formulas in order to discover whether
there is any monopoly price for his monopolized article and, if so, which
of various monopoly prices is the optimum price. The mathemaucal and
graphical disquisitions are therefore no less futile in this sector of action
than in any other sector. But, at least, they schematize the deliberations of
the monopolist and do not, as in the case of competitive prices, satisfy themselves in describing a merely auxiliary construction of theoretical analysis
which does not play a role in real action.
Contemporary mathematical economists have confused the study of
monopoly prices. They consider the monopolist not as the seller of a monopolized commodity, but as an entreprenuer and producer. However, it is
necessary to distinguish the monopoly gain clearly from entrepreneurial
profit. Monopoly gains can only be reaped by the seller of a commodity or
a service. An entrepreneur can reap them only in his capacity as seller of a
nlonopolized commodity, not in his entrepreneurial capacity. The advantages and disadvantages which may result from the fall or rise in cost of
production per unit with increasing total production, increase or diminish
the monopolist's total net proceeds and influence his conduct. But the
catallactic treatment of monopoly prices must not forget that the specific
monopoly gain stems, with due allowance made to the configuration of
demand, only from the monopoly of a commodity or a right. It is this alone
which affords to the monopolist the opportunity to restrict supply without
fear that other people can frustrate his action by expanding the quantity
they offer for sale. Attempts to define the conditions required for the
emergence of monopoly prices by resorting to the configuration of production costs are vain.
It is misleading t o describe the market situation resulting in competitive
prices by declaring that the individual producer could sell at the market
price also a greater quantity than what he really sells. This is true only
when two special conditions are fulfilled: the producer concerned, A, is
not the marginal producer, and expanding production does not require
additional costs which cannot be recovered in selling the additional
quantity of products. Then A's expansion forces the marginal producer t o
discontinue production; the supply offered for sale remains unchanged.

376
Hzlnzan Action
The characteristic mark of the competitive price as distinguished from the
monopoly price is that the former is the outcome of a situation under which
the owners of goods and services of all orders are compelled to serve best
the wishes of the consumers. On a competitive market there s no such
thing as a price policy of the sellers. They have no alternative other
than to sell as much as they can at the highest price offered to them.
But the monopolist fares better by withholding from the market a
part of the supply at his disposal in order to make specific monopoly
gains.

7. Good Will
It must be emphasized again that the market is peopled by men who
are not omniscient and have only a more or less defective knowledge
of prevailing conditions.
T h e buyer must always rely upon the trustworthiness of the seIler.
Even in the purchase of producers' goods the buyer, although as a
rule an expert in the field, depends to some extent on the reliability
of the seller. This is still more the case on the market for consumers'
goods. Here the seller for the most part excels the buyer in technological and commercial insight. The salesman's task is not simply to
sell what the customer is asking for. He must often advise the customer
how to choose the merchandise which can best satisfy his needs. The
retailer is not only a vendor; he is also a friendly helper. The public
does not heedlessly patronize every shop. If possible, a man prefers
a store or a brand with which he hirnself or trustworthy friends have
had good experience in the past.
Good wilI is the renown a business acquires on account of past
achievements. It implies the expectation that the bearer of the good
will in the future will live up to his earlier standards. Good will is
not a phenomenon appearing only in business relations. It is present
in all social relations. It determines a person's choice of his spouse
and of his friends and his voting for a candidate in elections. Catallactics, of course, deals only with commercial good will.
It does not matter whether the good will is based on real achievements and merits or whether it is only a product of imagination and
fallacious ideas. What counts in human action is not truth as it may
appear to an omniscient being, but the opinions of peopIe liable to
error. There are some instances in which customers are prepared to
pay a higher price for a special brand of a compound although the
branded article does not differ in its physical and chemical structure
from another cheaper product. Experts may deem such conduct unreasonable. But no man can acquire expertness in all fields which are

Prices

377

relevant for his choices. H e cannot entirely avoid substituting confidence in men for knowledge of the true state of affairs. T h e regular
customer does not always select the article or the service, but the
purveyor whom he trusts. H e pays a premium to those whom he
considers reliable.
T h e role which good will plays on the marltet does not impair or
restrict competition. Everybody is free to acquire good will, and
every bearer of good will can lose good will once acquired. Many
reformers, impelled by their bias for paternal government, advocate
authoritarian grade labeling as a substitute for trade-marks. They
would be right if rulers and bureaucrats were endowed with omniscience and perfect impartiality. But as officeholders are not free from
human weakness, the realization of such plans would merely substitute the defects of government appointees for those of individual
citizens. One does not make a man happier by preventing him from
discriminating between a brand of cigarettes or canned food he prefers and another brand he likes less.
The acquisition of good will requires not o n 1 ~
honesty and zeal in
attending to the customers, but no less moneyeexpenditure. It takcs
time until a firm has acquired a stcady clientele. In the interval it
must oftcn put up with losses against which it balances expected
later profits.
From the point of view of the seller good will is, as it were, a necessary factor of production. It is appraised accordingly. I t does not
mattcr that as a rule the money equivalent of the good will does not
appear in book cntries and balance sheets. If a business is sold, a price
is paid for the good will provided it is possible to transfer it to the
acquirer.
I t is consequently a problem of catallactics to investigate the nature
of this pcculiar thing called good will. In this scrutiny we must distinpish three different cases.
Case I . T h e good will gives to the seller the opportunitv to sell
at monopoly prices or to discriminate among various classes of buyers.
This does not differ from other instances of monopoly prices or price
discrimination.
Case 2. T h e good will eives to the seller merely the opportunitv t o
sell at prices corresponding to those which his competitors attain.
If he had no good will, he would not sell at all or onlv by cutting
prices. Good will is for him no less necessary than the business
premises, the keeping of a well-assorted stock of merchandise and the
hiring of skilled helpers. T h e costs incurred by the acquisition of
good will play the same role as any other business expenses. They

378
Human Action
must be defrayed in the same way by an excess of total proceeds
over total costs.
Case 3. The seller enjoys within a limited circle of staunch patrons
such a brilliant reputation that he can sell to them at higher prices than
those paid to his less renowned competitors. However, these prices
are not monopoly prices. They are not the result of a deliberate policy
aiming at a restriction in total sales for the sake of raising total net
proceeds. It may be that the seller has no opportunity whatsoever to
sell a larger quantity, as is the case for example, with a doctor who is
busy to the limit of his powers although he charges more than his
less popular colleagues. It may also be that the expansion of sales would
require additional capital investment and that the seller either lacks
this capital or believes that he has a more profitable employment for
it. What prevents an expansion of output and of the quantity of
merchandise or services offered for sale is not a purposive action on
the part of the seller, but the state of the market.
As the misinterpretation of these facts has generated a whole mythology of "imperfect competition" and "monopolistic competition,"
it is necessary to enter into a more detailed scrutiny of the considerations of an entrepreneur who is weighing the pros and cons of an
expansion of his business.
Expansion of a production aggregate, and no less increasing production from partial utilization of such an aggregate to full capacity
production, require additional capital investment which is reasonable only if there is no more profitable investment
It does
not matter whether the entrepreneur is rich enough to invest his own
funds or whether he would have to borrow the funds needed. AIso
that part of an entrepreneur's own capital which is not employed in
his firm is not "idle." It is utilized somewhere in the framework of
the economic system. In order to be employed for the expansion of
the business concerned these funds must be withdrawn from their
present ernpl~yrnent.~~
T h e entrepreneur will only embark upon
this change of investment if he expects from it an increase in his net
returns. In addition there are other doubts which may check the
propensity to expand a prospering enterprise even if the market
situation seems to offer propitious chances. The entrepreneur may
mistrust his own ability to manage a bigger outfit successfuIly.
zo. Expenditure for additional advertising also means additional input of
capital.
z I. Cash holding, even if it exceeds the customary amount and is called "hoarding," is a variety of employing funds available. Under the prcvailin state of the
market the actor considers cash holding the most appropriate cmp oyment of a
part of his assets.

B

Prices

379

He may also be frightened by the example provided by once prosperous enterprises for which expansion resulted in failure.
A businessman who, thanks to his splendid good will, is in a position
to sell at higher prices than less renowned competitors, could, of
course, renounce his advantage and reduce his prices to thc level of his
competitors. Like every seller of commodities or of labor he couId abstain from taking fullest advantage of the state of the market and sell at
a price at which demand exceeds supply. In doing so he would be
making presents to some people. The donees would be those who
could buy at this lowered price. Others, although ready to buy at
the same price, would have to go away emptyhanded because the
supply was not sufficient.
The restriction of the quantity of every article produced and offered
for sale is always the outcome of the decisions of entreprencurs intent upon reap& the highest possible profit and avoiding losses. The
characteristic mark of monopoly prices is not to be seen in the fact
that the entrepreneurs did not produce more of the article concerned
and thus did not bring about a fall in its price. Neither is it to be secn
in the fact that complementary factors of production remain unused
although their fuIler employment would have lowered the price of
the product. The only relevant question is whether or not the restriction of production is the outcome of the action of the-monopolistic
--owner of a supply of goods and services who withholds a part of
this supply in ordcr to attain higher prices for the rest. The characteristic feature of monopoly prices is the monopolist's defiance of
the wishes of the consumers. A competitive price for copper means
that the final price of copper tends toward a point at which the deposits are exploited to the extent permitted by the prices of the required nonspecific complementary factors of production; the marginal mine does not yield mining rent. The consumers are getting
as much copper as they themselves detcrmine by the prices they
allow for copper and all other commodities. A monopoly price of
copper means that the deposits of copper are utiiized oniy to a smaiier
degree because this is more advantageous to the owners; capital and
labor which, if the supremacy of the consumers were not infringed,
would have been employed for the production of additional copper,
are employed for the production of other articles for which the demand of the consumers is less intense. The interests of the owners
of the copper deposits take precedence over those of the consumers.
The available resources of copper are not employed according to the
wishes and plans of the public.
Profits are, of course, also the outcome of a discrepancy between

380
Human Action
the wishes of the consumers and the actions of the entrepreneurs. If
the entrepreneurs had had in the past better foresight of the present
state of the market, no profits and Iosses would have emerged. Their
competition would have already adjusted in the past-duc allowance
being made for time preference-the prices of the complementary
factors of production to the present prices of the products. But this
staterncnt cannot brush away the fundamental diffcrencc bctween
profits and monopoly gains. The cntrcprencur profits to the extent
he has succeeded in serving the consumers better than othcr people
have done. The monopolist reaps monopoly gains through impairing
the satisfaction of thc consumers.

8. Monopoly of Demand
Monopoly prices can emerge only from a monopoly of supply. A
monopoly of demand does not bring about a ~narketsituation different from that under not monopolized demand. The monopolistic
buyer-whether he is an individual or a group of individuals acting
in concert-cannot reap a specific gain corresponding to the monopoly gains of monopolistic sellers. If he restricts demand, he will
buy at a lower price. But then the quantity bought will drop too.
In the same way in which governments restrict competition in
order to improve the position of privileged sellers, they can also
restrict competition for the benefit of privileged buyers. Again and
again governments have put an embargo on the export of certain
commodities. Thus by excluding foreign buyers they have aimed
at lowering the domestic price. But such a lower price is not a counterpart of monopoly prices.
What is commonly dealt with as monopoly of demand are certain
phenomena of the determination of prices for specific complementary
factors of production.
The production of one unit of the commodity m requires, besides
the employment of various nonspecific factors, the employment of one
unit of cach of the two absolutely specific factors a and b. Neither a
nor b can be replaced by any other factor; on the other hand a is of
no use whcn not cotnbined with b and vice versa. The available suppIy
of a by far exceeds the available supply of b. It is therefore not possible for the owners of n to attain any price for a. T h e demand for a
always lags behind the supply; a is not an economic good. If a is a
mineral deposit the extraction of which requires the use of capital
and labor, the ownership of the deposits does not yield a royalty.
There is no mining rcnt.

Prices
But if the owners of a form a cartel, they can turn the tables. They
can restrict the supply of a offered for sale to such a fraction that
the supply of b exceeds the supply of a. Now a becomes an economic
good for which prices are paid while the price of b dwindles to zero.
If thcn the owners of b react by forming a cartel too, a price struggle
develops between the two monopolistic combines about the outcome
of which catallactics can bake no statements. As has already been
pointed out, the pricing process does not bring about a uniqueIy determined result in cases in which more than one of the factors of production required is of an absolutely specific character.
I t does not matter whether or not the market situation is such that
the factors a and b together could bc sold at monopoly prices. It
does not make any difference whether the price for a lot including one unit of both a and b is a monopoly price or a competitive
price.
Thus what is sometimes viewed as a monopoly of demand turns
out to be a monopoly of supply formed under particular conditions.
T h c sellers of a and of b are intent upon selling at monopoly prices
without regard to the question whether or not the price of 7n can become a monopoly price. What alone matters for them is to obtain as
great a share as possible of the joint price which the buyers are ready to
pay for a and b together. T h e case does not indicate any feature which
would make it permissible to apply to it the term monopoly of demand. This mode of expression becomes understandable, however,
if one takes into account the accidental features marking the contest
between the two groups. If the owners of a (or b) are at the same time
the entreprencurs conducting the processing of m, their cartel takes
on the outward appearance of a monopoly of demand. But this personal union combining two separate catallactic functions does not
alter the essential issue; what is at stake is the settlement of affairs
between two groups of monopolistic sellers.
Our example fits, mutatis mutandis, the case in which a and b can
aiso be empioyed for purposes other than the production of nz, provided these other employments only yield smaller returns.

9. Consumption as Affected by Monopoly Prices
The individual consumer may react to monopoly prices in different
ways.
I. h'otwithstanding the rise in price, the individual consumer does
not restrict his purchases of the monopolized article. He prefers to
restrict the purchase of other goods. (If all consumers were to react

382
Human Action
in this way, the competitive price would have already risen to the
height of the monopoly price.)
2. The consumer restricts his purchase of the monopolized article
to such an extent that he does not spend for it more than he would
have spent-for the purchase of a larger quantity-under the competitive price. (If all people were to react in this way, the seller
would not get more under the monopoly price than he did under
the competitive price; he would not derive any gain by deviating
from the competitive price.)
3. The consumer restricts his purchase of the monopolized commodity to such an extent that he spends less for it than he would
have spent under the competitive price; he buys with the money thus
saved goods which he would not have bought otherwise. (If all people were to react in this way, the seller would harm his interests by
substituting a higher price for the competitive price; no monopoly
price could emerge. Only a benefactor who wanted to wean his
fellow men from the consumption of pernicious drugs would in this
case raise the price of the article concerned above the competitive
level.)
4. The consumer spends more for the monopolized commodity
than he would have spent under the competitive price and acquires
only a smaller quantity of it.
However the consumer may react, his satisfaction appears to be
impaired from the viewpoint of his own vahations. He is not so
well served under monopoly prices as under competitive prices. The
monopoly gain of the selleE is borne by a monopoly deprivation of
the buyer. Even if some consumers (as in case 3) acquire goods which
they would not have bought in the absence of the monopoly price,
their satisfaction is lower than it would have been under a different
state of prices. Capital and labor which are withdrawn from the production of products which drops on account of the monopolistic restriction of the supply of one of the complementary factors required
C
,
"

cL,:,

,",A

..,.,,:+

A,,

,1,2

",C

,.I*

-.+:,.a-.-

-C -cL-- Llllll
-t:--3

1 U l L l 1 G 1 1 ~ I U U U L L L U l I ,' l l L C L I I p J y L U L U I L 1 1 G y l u U U C L l U l 1 U l U L I I G I

which would otherwise not have been produced. But the consumers
value these other things less.
Yet there is an exception to this general rule that monopoly prices
benefit the seller and harm the buyer and infringe the supremacy of
the consumers' interests. If on a competitive market one of the complementary factors, namely f , needed for the production of the consumers' good g, does not attain any price at all, although the production of f requires various expenditures and consumers are ready to
pay for the consumers' good g a price which makes its production

Prices

383

profitable on a competitive market, the monopoly price for f becomes
a ncccssary requirement for the production of g. It is this idea that
~ e o p l eadvance in favor of patent and copyright legislation. If inventors and authors were not in a position to make money by inventing and writing, they would be prevented from devoting their time
to these activities and from defraying the costs involved. The public
would not derive any advantage from the absence of monopoly prices
for f . It would, on the contrary, miss the satisfaction it could derive
from the acquisition of g.Z"
Many pcople are alarmed by the recltless use of the deposits of
minerals and oil which cannot be replaced. Our contemporaries, they
say, squander an exhaustible stock without any regard for the coming generations. W e are consuming our own birthright and that of
the future. Now these complaints make little sense. W e do not know
whether later ages will still rely upon the same raw materials on
which we depend today. I t is true that the exhaustion of the oil deposits and even those of coal is progressing at a quick rate. But it is
very likely that in a hundred or five hundred years people will resort
to other methods of producing hcat and power. Nobody knows
whether we, in being less profligate with these deposits, would not
deprive ourselves without any advantage to mcn of the twenty-first
or of the twenty-fourth centuries. It is vain to provide for the'needs
of ages the technoIogica1 abilities of which we cannot even dream.
But it is contradictory if the sainc people who lament the depletion
of some natural resources are no less vehement in indicting monopolistic restraint in their present-day exploitation. The effect of monopoly prices of mercury is certainly a slowing down of the rate of depletion. In the eyes of those frightened by the aspect of a future
scarcity of mercury this effect must appear highly desirable.
Economics in unmasking such contradictions does not aim at a
"justification" of monopoly prices for oil, minerals, and ore. Economics has neither the task of justifying nor of condemning. It has
merely to scrutinize the effects of all modes of human action. It does
not enter the arena in which friends and foes of rnonopoly prices are
intent upon pleading their causes.
Both sides in this hcated controversy resort to fallacious arguments.
T h e antimonopoly party is wrong in attributing to every monopoly
the power to impair the situation of the buyers by restricting supply
and bringing about monopoly prices. I t is no less wrong in assuming
that there prevails within a market economy, not hampered and
sabotaged by government interference, a general tendency toward
2 2 . See below, pp. 676677.

384
Human Action
the formation of monopoly. It is a grotesque distortion of the true
state of affairs to speak of monopoly capitalism instead of monopoly
interventionism and of private cartels instead of government-made
cartels. Monopoly prices would be limited to some minerals which
can be mined in only a few places and to the field of local limitedspace monopolies if the government were not intent upon fostering
them.
The promonopoly party is wrong in crediting to the cartels the
economies of big-scale production. Monopolistic concentration of
production in one hand, they say, as a rule reduces average costs of
production and thus increases the amount of capital and labor available for additional production. However, no cartel is needed in order
to eliminate the plants producing at higher costs. Competition on the
free market achieves this effect in the absence of any monopoly and of
any monopoly prices. It is, on the contrary, often the purpose of
government-sponsored cartelization to preserve the existence of
plants and farms which the free market would force to discontinue
operations precisely because they are producing at too high costs of
production. The free market would have eliminated, for example,
the submarginal farms and preserved only those for which production
pays under the prevailing rnarket price. But the New Deal preferred
a different arrangement. It forced all farmers to a proportional restriction of output. It raised by its monopolistic policy the price of agricultural products to such a height that production became reasonable again on submarginal soil.
No less erroneous are the conclusions derived from a confusion of
the economies of product standardization and monopoly. Tf men
asked only for one standard type of a definite commodity, production
could be arranged in a more economical way and cdsts would be
lowered accordingly. But if people were to behave in such a manner,
standardization and the corresponding cost reduction would emerge
also in the absence of monopoly. If, on the other hand, one forces the
consumers to be content with one standard type only, one does not
increase their satisfaction; one impairs it. A dictator may deem the
conduct of the consumers rather foolish. W h y should not women
be dressed in uniforms like soldiers? W h y should they be so crazy
about individually fashioned clothes? He may be right from the point
of view of his own value judgments. But the trouble is that valuation
is personal, individual, and arbitrary. The democracy of the market
consists in the fact that people themselves make their choices and
that no dictator has the power to force them to submit to his value
judgments,

Prices
10. Price

Discrimination on the Part of the Seller

Both competitive prices and monopoly prices are the same for all
buyers. There prevails on the tnarket a permanent tendency to
eliminate all discrepancies in prices for the same commodity or
service. Although the valuations of the buyers and the intensity of
their demand as effective on the market are different, they pay the
same prices. T h e wealthy man does not pay more for bread than the
less wealthy man, although he would be ready to pay a higher price
if he could not buy it cheaper. T h e enthusiast who would rather
restrict his consumption of food than miss a performance of a Beethoven symphony pays no more for admission than a man for whom
music is merely a pastime and who would not care for the concert
if he could attend it only by renouncing his desire for some trifles.
T h e difference between the price one must pay for a good and the
highest amount one would be prepared to pay for it has sometimes
been called consumers7
I3ut there can appear on the market conditions which make it possible for the seller to discriminate between the buyers. H e can sell a
commodity or a service at different prices to different buyers. H e
can obtain prices which may sometimes even rise to the point at which
the whole consumers7surplus of a buyer disappears. T w o conditions
must coincide in order to make price discrimination advantageous
to the seller.
T h e first condition is that those buying at a cheaper price are
not in a position to resell the commodity or the service to people to
whom the discriminating seller sells only at a higher price. If such
reselling cannot be prevented, the first seller's intention would be
thwarted. The second condition is that the public does not react in
such a way that the total net proceeds of the seller lag behind the
total net proceeds he would obtain under price uniformity. This
second condition is always present under conditions which would
make it advantageous to a seller to substitute nlonopoly prices for competitive prices. But it can also appear under a market situation which
would not bring about monopoly gains. For price discrimination
does not enjoin upon the seller the ncccssity of restricting the amount
sold. H e does not lose any buyer completely; he must merely takc into
account that some buyers may restrict the amount of their purchases.
But as a rule he has the opportunity to sell the remainder of his supply
to people who would not have bought at all or would have bought
23. Cf.A. MarshaI1, Principles of Economics (8th ed. London, 1g3o), pp. 124127.

386

Human Action

only smaller quantities if they had had to pay the uniform competitive
price.
Consequently the configuration of production costs plays no role
in the considerations of the discriminating seller. Production costs are
not affected as the total amount produced and sold remains unaltered.
T h e most common case of price discrimination is that of physicians.
A doctor who can perform 80 treatments in a week and charges $3
for each treatment is fully employed by attending to 3 0 patients and
makes $240 a week. If he charges the 10 wealthiest patients, who together consume 50 treatments, $4 instead of $3, they will consume
only 40 treatments. The doctor sells the remaining 10 treatments at
$2 each to patients who would not have expended $3 for his professional services. Then his weekly proceeds rise to $270.
As price discrimination is practiced by the seller only if it is more
advantageous to him than selling at a uniform price, it is obvious that
it results in an alteration of consumption and the allocation of factors
of production to various employments. The outcome of discrimination is always that the total amount expended for the acquisition of
the good concerned increases. The buyers must provide for their
excess expenditure by cutting down other purchases. As it is very
unlikely that those benefited by price discrimination will spend their
gains for the purchase of the same goods as those the other people no
longer buy in the same quantity, changes in the market data and in
production become unavoidable.
In the above example the 10 wealthiest patients are damaged; they
pay $4 for a service for which they used to pay only $3. But it is not
only the doctor who derives advantage from the discrimination; the
patients whom he charges $ 2 are benefited too. It is true they must
provide the doctor's fees by renouncing other satisfactions. However, they value these other satisfactions less than that conveyed to
them by the doctor's treatment. Their degree of contentment attained is increased.
For a full comprehension of price discrimination it is we11 to
remember that, under the division of labor, competition among those
eager to acquire the same product does not necessariIy impair the
individual competitor's position. The competitors' interests are antagonistic only with regard to the services rendered by the complementary nature-given factors of production. This inescapable natural
antagonism is superseded by the advantages derived from the division
of labor. As far as average costs of production can be reduced by bigscale production, competition among those eager to acquire the same
commodity brings about an improvement in the individual competi-

Prices

387

tor's situation. The fact that not only a few people but a great number
are eager to acquire the commodity c makes it possibIe to manufacture
it in cost-saving processes; then even people with modest means can
afford it. In the same way it can sometimes happen that price discrimination renders the satisfaction of a need possible which would
have remained unsatisfied in its absence.
There live in a city p lovers of music, each of whom would be prepared to spend $2 for the recital of a virtuoso. But such a concert
requires an expenditure greater than 2 p dollars and can therefore not
bc arranged. But if discrimination of admission fees is possible and
among the p friends of music n are ready to spend $4, the recital becomes feasible, provided that the amount 2 (n #) dollars is sufficient. Then n people spend $4 each and ( p - n) people $2 each
for the admission and forego the satisfaction of the least urgent need
they would have satisfied if they had not preferred to attend the recital. Each person in the audience fares better than he would have
if the unfeasibility of price discrimination had prevented the performance. It is to the interest of the organizers to enlarge the audience
t o the point at which thc admission of additional customers involves
higher costs than the fees they are ready to spend.
Things would be different if the recital would have been arranged
in spite of the fact that none of those admitted paid more than $ 2 .
Thcn price discrimination would have impaired the satisfaction of
those who are charged $4.
The most common practices in selling admission tickets for artistic
performances and railroad tickets at different rates are not the outcome of price discrimination in the catallactical sense of the term.
H e who pays a higher rate gets something appreciated more than
he who pays less. He gets a better seat, a more comfortable traveling
opportunity, and so on. Genuine price discrimination is present in the
case of physicians who, although attending to each patient with the
same care, charge the wealthier clients more than the less wealthy. It
is present in the case of railroads charging more for the shipping of
goods the transportation of which adds more to their value than
for others although the costs incurred by the railroad are the same.
It is obvious that both the doctor and the railroad can practice discrimination only within the limits fixed by the opportunity given
to the patient and the shipper to find another solution of their problems more to their own advantage. But this refers to one of the two
conditions required for the emergence of price discrimination,
It would be idle to point out a state of affairs in which price discrimination could he practiced by all sellers of all kinds of commodi-

+

388
Hzrnzan Action
ties and services. It is more important to establish the fact that within
a market economy not sabotaged by government interference the
conditions required for price discrimination are so rare that it can
fairly be called an exceptional phenomenon.
I I.

Price Discrimination on the Part of the Buyer

While monopoly prices and monopoly gains cannot be realized to
the advantage of a monopolistic buyer, the case is different with price
discrimination. There is only one condition required for the emergence of price discrimination on the part of a monopolistic buyer on
a free market, namely, crass ignorance of the state of the market
on the part of the sellers. As such ignorance is unliltely to last for any
length of time, price discrimination can only be practiced if the government interferes.
T h e Swiss Government has established a government owned and
operated trade monopoly for cereals. I t buys cereals at world-market
prices on foreign markets and at higher prices from domestic farmers.
In domestic purchases it pays a higher pricc to farmers producing at
higher costs on the rocky soil of the tnountain districts and a lower
price-although still higher than the world-marlcet price-to the
farmers tilling more fertile land.
I z.

The Csnnexity of Prices

If a definite process of production brings about the products p and
q simultaneously, the entrepreneuria1 decisions and actions are directed
by weighing the sum of the anticipated prices of p and q. T h e prices
of p and q are particularly connected with one another as changes in
the demand for p (or for q ) generate changes in the supply of q (or
of p). T h e mutual relation of the prices of p and q can be called connexity of production. The businessman calls p (or q) a by-product of
4 (or P ) .
T h e production of the consumers' good s requires the emplovment
of the factors p and q, the production of p the employment of the
factors a and b, and the production of q the ernplo$nent of the
factors c and d. Then changes in the supply of p (or of q ) bring about
changes in the demand for q (or for p ) . I t does not matter whether the
process of producing z out of p and q is accompIished bv the same
enterprises which produce p out of n and b and q out of c and d, or by
entrepreneurs financially independent of one another. or by the consumers themselves as a preliminary step in their consuming. The

Prices

389

prices of p and q are particularly connected with one another because p is useless or of a smaller utility without q and vice versa. The
mutual relation of the prices of p and q can be called connexity of
consumption.
If the services rendered by a commodity b can be substituted, even
though in a not perfectly satisfactory way, for those rendered by
another commodity a, a change in the price of one of them affects
the price of the other too. The mutual relation of the prices of a and
b can be called connexity of substitution.
Connexity of production, connexity of consumption, and connexity of substitution are particular connexities of the prices of a
limited number of commodities. From these particular connexities
one must distinguish the general connexity of the prices of all goods
and services. This general connexity is the outcome of the fact that
for every kind of want-satisfaction, besides various more or less
specific factors, one scarce factor is required which, in spite of the
differences in its qualitative power to produce, can, within the limits
precisely defined
be called a nonspecific factor-namely,
labor.
Within a hypothetical world in which all factors of production
are absolutely specific, human action would operate in a multiplicity
of fields of want-satisfaction independent of one another. What links
together in our actual world the various fields of want-satisfaction
is the existence of a great many nonspecific factors, suitable to be
employed for the attainment of various ends and to be substituted
in some degree for one another. T h e fact that one factor, labor, is on
the one hand required for every kind of production and on the other
hand is, within the limits defined, nonspecific, brings about the general connexity of all human activities. It integrates the pricing process
into a whole in which all gears work on one another. It makes the market a concatenation of mutually interdependent phenomena.
It would be absurd to look upon a definite price as if it were an
isolated object in itself. A price is expressive of the position which
acting men attach to a thing under the present state of their efforts
to remove uneasiness. It does not indicate a relationship to something
unchanging, but merely the instantaneous position in a kaleidoscopically changing assemblage. In this collection of things considered
valuable by the value judgments of acting men each particle's place
is interrelated with those of all other particles. What is called a price
is always a relationship within an integrated system which is the composite effect of human valuations.
24. Cf. above,

pp. 133-135.

3 90

Human Action
K 3. Prices and Income

A market price is a real historical phenomenon, the quantitative ratio
at which at a definite place and at a definite date two individuals exchanged definite quantities of two definite goods. It refers to the
special conditions of the concrete act of exchange. It is ultimately
determined by the value judgments of the individuals involved. It
is not derived from the general price structure or from the structure
of the prices of a special class of commodities or services. What is
called the price structure is an abstract notion derived from a multiplicity of individual concrete prices. The market does not generate
prices of land or motorcars in general nor wage rates in general, but
prices for a certain piece of land and for a certain car and wage rates
for a performance of a certain kind. It does not make any difference
for the pricing process to what class the things exchanged are to be
assigned from any point of view. However they may differ in other
regards, in the very act of exchange they are nothing but commodities,
i.e., things valued on account of their power to remove felt uneasiness.
The market does not create or determine incomes. It is not a process
of income formation. If the owner of a piece of land and the worker
husband the physical resources concerned, the land and the man mi11
renew and preserve their pourer to render services; the agricultural
and urban land for a practically indefinite period, the man for a number of years. If the market situation for these factors of production
does not deteriorate, it will be possible in the future too to attain a
price for their productive employment. Land and working power can
be considered as sources of income if they are deaIt with as such, that
is, if their capacity to produce is not prematurely exhausted by reckless exploitation. It is provident restraint in the use of factors of production, not their natural and physical properties, which convert
them into somewhat durable sources of income. There is in nature
no such thing as a stream of income. Income is a category of action;
it is the outcome of careful economizing of scarce factors. This is still
more obvious in the case of capital goods. T h e produced factors of
production are not permanent. Although some of them may have a
life of many years, all of them eventually become uscless through
wear and tear, sometimes even by the mere passing of time. They
become durable sources of income only if their owners treat them
as such. Capital can be preserved as a source of income if the consumption of its products, market conditions remaining unchanged, is
restricted in such a way as not to impair the replacement of the worn
out parts.

Prices

391

Changes in the market data can frustrate every endeavor to perpetuate a source of income. Industrial equipment becomes obsolete if
demand changes or if it is superseded by something better. Land becomes useless if more fertile soil is made accessible in sufficient
quantities. Expertness and skill for the performance of special kinds
of work lose their remunerativeness when new fashions or new
methods of production narrow the opportunity for their employment. The success of any provision for the uncertain future depends
on the correctness of the anticipations which guided it. No income
can be made safe against changes not adequately foreseen.
hTeitheris the pricing process a form of distribution. As has been
pointed out already, there is nothing in the market economy to which
the notion of distribution could be applied.

14.

Prices and Production

The pricing process directs production into those channels in
which it best serves the wishes of the consumers as manifested on the
market. Only in the case of monopoly prices have the monopolists
the power to divert production, within a limited range, from this line
into other lines to their own benefit.
The prices detcrminc which of the factors of production should
be employed and which should be left unused. 'She spccific factors
of poduction are employed only if there is no more valuable employment available for the complementary nonspecific factors. There
are technological recipes, land, and nonconvertible capital goods
whose capacity to produce remains unused because their employment would mean a waste of the scarcest of all factors, labor. While
under the conditions present in our world there cannot be in the
long run unemployment of labor in a free labor market, unused
capacity of land and of inconvertible industrial equipment is a regular
phenomenon.
I t is nonsense to lament the fact of unused capacity. The unused
capacity of equipment made obsolete by technological improvement
is a landmark of material progress. It would be a blessing if the establishment of durable peace would render munitions plants unused or
if the discovery of an efficient method of preventing and curing
tuberculosis would render obsolete sanatoria for the treatment of
people affected by this evil. It would be sensible to deplore the lack
of provision in the past which resulted in malinvestmcnt of capital
goods. Yet, men are not infallible. A certain amount of malinves&ent

392
Human Action
is unavoidable. What has to be done is to shun policies like credit expansion which artificially foster malinvestment.
Modern technology could easily grow oranges and grapes in hothouses in the arctic and subarctic countries. Everybody would call
such a venture lunacy. But it is essentially the same to preserve the
growing of cereals in rocky mountain valleys by tariffs and other
devices of protectionism while elsewhere there is plenty of fallow
fertile land. The difference is merely one of degree.
T h e inhabitants of the Swiss Jura prefer to manufacture watches
instead of growing wheat. Watchmaking is for them the cheapest
way to acquire wheat. On the other hand the growing of wheat is
the cheapest way for the Canadian farmer to acquire watches. The
fact that the inhabitants of the Jura do not grow wheat and the
Canadians do n o t manufacture watches is not more worthy of notice
than the fact that tailors do not make their shoes and shoemakers do
not make their clothes.

15. T h e Chimera of Nonmarket Prices
Prices are a market phenomenon. They arc generated by the market process and are the pith of the market economy. There is no such
thing as prices outside the market. Prices cannot be constructed
synthetically, as it were. They are the resultant of a certain constellation of market data, of actions and reactions of the members of a
market society. It is vain to meditate what prices would have been if
some of their determinants had been different. Such fantastic designs
are not more sensible than whimsical speculations about what the
course of history would have been if Napoleon had been killed in the
battle of Arcole or if Lincoln had ordered Major Anderson to withdraw from Fort Sumter.
It is no less vain to ponder on what prices ought to be. Everybody
i c nlensed if the price5 of things he wants to huy drop and the prices
-- r----of the things he wants to selI rise. In expressing such wishes a man is
sincere if he admits that his point of view is personal. It is another
question whether, from his personal point of view, he would be well
advised to prompt the government to use its power of coercion and
oppression to interfere with the market's price structure. It will be
shown in the sixth part of this book what the inescapable consequences
of such a policy of interventionism must be.
But one deludes oneself or practices deception if one calls such
wishes and arbitrary value judgments the voice of objective truth. In
human action nothhg counts but the various individuals' desires for

the attainment of ends. With regard to the choice of these ends there
is no question of truth; all that matters is value. Value judgments are
necessarily always subjective, whether they are passed by one man
only or by many men, by a blockhead, a professor, or a statesman.
Any price determined on a market is the necessary outgrowth of
the interplay of the forces operating, that is, demand and suppIy.
Whatever the market situation which generated this price may be,
with regard to it the price is always adequate, genuine, and real. It
cannot be higher if no bidder ready to offer a higher price turns up,
and it cannot be lower if no seller ready to deliver at a lower price
turns up. Only the appearance of such people ready to buy or to
sell can alter prices.
Economics analyzes the market process which generates commodity
prices, wage rates, and interest rates. It does nor develop formulas
which would enable anybody to compute a "correct" price different
from that established on the market by the interaction of buyers and
sellers.
At the bottom of many efforts to determine nonnlarket prices
is the confused and contradictory notion of real costs. If costs were
a real thing, i.e., a quantity independent of personal valuc judgments
and objectively discernible and measurable, it would be possible for
a disinterested'arbiter to determine their height and thus the correct
price. There is no need to dwell any longer on the absurdity of rhis
idea. Costs are a phenomenon of valuation. Costs are the valuc attached
to the most valuable want-satisfaction which remains unsatisfied because the means required for its satisfaction are employed for that
want-satisfaction the cost of which we are dealing with. The attainment of an excess of the value of the product over the costs, a profit,
is the goal of every production effort. Profit is the pay-off of successful action. It cannot be defined without reference to valuation.
It is a phenomenon of valuation and has no direct reIation to physical
and other phenomena of the external world.
Economic analysis cannot help reducing all items of cost to value
judgments. The socialists and interventionists call entrepreneurial
profit, interest on capital, and rent of land "unearned" because they
consider that only the toil and trouble of the worker is real and worthy
of being rewarded. I3owever, reality does not reward toil and trouble.
If toil and trouble is expended according to well-conceived plans, its
outcome increases the means available for want-satisfaction. Whatever some people may consider as just and fair, the only relevant question is always the same. What alone matters is which system of social
organization is better suited to attain those ends for which people are

3 94
Human Action
ready to expend toil and trouble. The question is market economy, or
socialism? Thcre is no third solution. T h e notion of a market economy
with nonmarket prices is absurd. The vcry idea of cost prices is unrealizable. Even if the cost price formula is applied only to entrepreneurial profits, it paralyzes the market. If commodities and services
are to be sold below the price the market would have dctcrmined for
them, supply always Jags behind demand. Then the market can
neither determine w-hat should or should not be produced, nor to
whom the commodities and services should go. Chaos results.
This refers also to monopoly prices. It is reasonable to abstain from
all policies which could result in the emergence of monopoly prices.
But whether monopoly prices are brought about by such promonopoly government policies or in spite of the absence of such policies,
no allkged "fact finding" and no armchair speculation can discover
another price at which demand and supply would become equal. The
failure of a11 experiments to find a satisfactory solution for the limitedspace monopoly of public utilities clearly proves this truth.
It is the very essence of prices that they are the offshoot of the
actions of individuals and groups of individuals acting on their own
behalf. The catallactic concept of exchange ratios and prices precludes
anything that is the effect of actions of a central authority, of people
resorting to violence and threats in the name of society or the state
or of an armed pressure group. In declaring that it is not the business
of the government to determine prices, we do not step beyond the
borders of logical thinking. A government can no more determine
prices than a goose can lay hen's eggs.
W e can think of a social system in which there are no prices at all,
and we can think of government decrees which aim at fixing prices at
a height different from that w-hich the market would determine. It is
one of the tasks of economics to study the problems implied. However, precisely because we want to examine these problems it is necessary clearly to distinguish between prices and government decrees.
Prices are by definition determined-by peoples' buying and selling
or abstention from buying and selling. They must not be confused with
fiats issued by governments or other agencies enforcing their orders
by an apparatus of coercion and c o m p u l s i ~ n . ~ ~
25. In order not to confuse the reader by the introduction of too many new
terms, we shall keep t o the widespread usage of calling such fiats prices, interest
rates, wage sates decreed and enforced by governments or other agencies of compulsion (eg., labor unions). But one must never lose sight of the fundamental
difference between the market phenomena of prices, wages, and interest rates on
the one hand, and the legal phenomena of maximum o r minimum prices, wages,
and interest rates, designed to nullify these market phenomena, on the other
hand.

XVII. INDIRECT EXCHANGE
I.

Media of Exchange and Money

cxchange is called indircct exchange if, between the
commodities and services thc reciprocal exchange of which is the
Iultimate
end of exchanging, one or several media of exchange are interSTERPEKSONAL

posed. Thc subject matter of the theory of indirect cxchange is the
study of the ratios of exchange between the media of exchange on the
one hand and the goods and services of all orders on thc other hand.
The statements of the theory of indirect exchange refer to all instances
of indirect exchange and to all things which are employed as media of
cxchange.
A medium of exchange which is commonly used as such is called
money. T h e notion of money is vague, as its definition refers to the
vague term "commonly used." Therc are borderline cases in which
it cannot be decided whether a medium of exchange is or is not "commonly-" used and should be called money. But this vaguencss in the
denotation of money in no way affects the cxactitude and precision
required by praxeological theory. For all that is to be predicated of
money is valid for every medium of exchange. I t is therefore immaterial whether one prescrves the traditional tcrm theory of money
or substitutes for it another tcrm. The theory of money was and is
always the theory of indirect exchangc and of the media of cxchange.1
2.

Observations o n Some Widespread Errors

Thc fateful errors of popular monetary doctrincs which have
Icd astray the monetary policies of almost all governments would
hardly have come into existence if many economists had not themselves committed blunders in dealing with monctary issues and did not
stubbornly cling to them.
Thcrc is first of all the spurious idea of the supposed neutrality of
money.2 An outgrowth of this doctrine was the notion of the "level"
r. The theory of monetary calculation does not belong to the theory of in.
direct exchange. It is a part of the general theory of praxeology.
2. Cf. above, p. 203. Important contributions to the history and t e r m i n d o p
of this doctrine are provided by Hayek, Prices m d Production (rev. ed. London,

19351, pp. 1 ff,

1 2 9 ff.

396
Human Action
of prices that rises or falls proportionately with the increase or ciecrcasc in the quantity of money in circulation. I t was not realized that
changes in thc quantity of money can ncvcr effect the prices of all
goods and services at the same time and to thc same extent. Nor was
it realized that changes in the purchasing power of the monetary
unit are necessaril~linked with changes in the mutual rclations between tllose buying and sclling. In order to provc the doctrine that
the quantity of moncy and prices risc and fall proportionately, rccourse was had in dealing with thc theory of money to a procedure
entirely different from that modern economics applies in dealing with
all its other problems. Instead of starting from the actions of individuals, as catallactics must do without exception, formulas w-ere constructed designed to comprehend thc whole of the market economy.
Elements of these formulas were: the total supply of money available in the Volkswirtschaft; the volume of tradc-i.e.,
the money
equivalent of all transfers of conimoditics and scrvices as effected in
the Volkswirtschaft; the average velocity of circulation of the monetary units: the level of prices. These formulas scemingly provided
evidence of the correctness of thc pricc lcvcl doctrine. In fact, however, this whoIe mode of reasoning is a typical case of arguing in a
circle. For the equation of exchange already involves the level doctrines which it tries to prove. I t is essentiaily nothing but a rnathematical expression of the-untenable-doctrine
that there is proportionality in the Inovcments of thc quantity of money and of prices.
Tn analyzing the equation of exchange one assumes that one of its
elements-total supply of money, volume of trade, velocity of circulation-changcs, without asking how such changes ocdur. I t is
not recognized that changes in these magnitudes do not emerge in
the Volkswirtschaft as such, but in the individual actors' conditions,
and that it is the interplay of the reactions of these actors that rcsults in alterations of the pricc structure. T h e mathematical economists refuse to start from the various individuals' demand for and
supplv of money. They introduce instead thc spurious notion of
velocity of circulation fashioned according to the patterns of mechanics.
There is at this point of our reasoning no need to deal with the
question of whether or not the mathematical economists are right in
assuming that the services rendered by money consist wholl\; or essentially in its turnover. in its circulation. E& if this w e r e true, it
w-ouId still be faulty to explain the purchasing power-the priceof the monetary unit on the basis of its services. T h e services rendered
by water, whi&, and coffee do not explain the prices paid for these

Indirect Exchange

3 97

things. What they explain is only why people, as far as they recognize
these services, under certain further conditions demand definite quantities of these things. I t is always demand that influences the price
structure, not the objective value in use.
It is true that with regard to money the task of catallactics is
broader than with regard to vendible goods. It is not the task of
catallactics, but of psychology and physiology, to explain why people are intent on securing the services which the various vendible
commodities can render. Tt is a task of catallactics, however, to deal
with this question with regard t o money. Catallactics alone can t e l
us what advantages a man expects from holding money. But it is not
these expected advantages which determine the purchasing power
of money. The eagerness to secure these advantages is only one of
the factors in bringing about the demand for rnoncy. It is demand, a
subjective element whose intensity is entirely dcterrnined by value
judgments, and not any objective fact, any powcr to bring about a
certain effect, that plays a role in the formation of the market's exchange ratios.
T h e deficiency of the equation of exchange and its basic elements
is that they look at market phenomena from a holistic point of view.
They are deluded by their prepossession with the Volkswirtschaft
notion. But whcre tlkre is, in the strict sense of the term, a Volksr
wirtschaft, there is neither a market nor prices and money. On a
market there are only individuals or groups of individuals acting in
concert. What motivates these actors is their own concerns, not those
of the whole market economy. If there is any sense in such notions
as volume of trade and velocity of circulation, then they refer to the
resultant of the individuals' actions. It is not permissible to resort to
these notions in order to explain the actions of the individuals. ' l h
first question that catallactics must raise with regard to changes in
the total quantity of money available in the market system is how
such changcs affect the vahous individuals' conduct. - ~ o d e r neconomics does not ask what "iron" or "bread" is worth, but what a
definite piece of iron or of bread is worth to an acting individual at
a definite date and a definite place. I t cannot help proceeding in the
same way with regard to money. T h e equation of exchange is incompatible with the fundamental principles of economic thought.
I t is a relapse to the thinking of ages in which people failed to comprehend praxeological phenomena because they were committed to
holistic notions. It is stcrilc, as were the specularions of earlier ages
concerning the vaIuc of "iron" and "bread" in general.
T h e theory of money is an essential part of the catallactic theory.

398

Human Action

It must be dealt with in the same manner which is applied to all other
cataIIactic problems.

3. Demand for h4oney and Supply of Money
In the marketability of the various commodities and scrvices there
prcvail considerable differences. There are goods for which it is not
difficult to find applicants ready to disburse the highest recompense
which, under the given state of affairs, can possibly be obtained, or
a recompense only slightly smaller. There are other goods for which
it is very hard to find a customer quickly, even if the vendor is ready
to be content with a compensation much smaller than hc could reap
if he could find another aspirant whose demand is more intense. It
is these differences in the marketability of the various commodities
and scrvices which created indirect exchange. A man who at the
instant cannot acquire what he wants to get for the conduct of his
own household or business, or who does not yet know what kind of
goods he will need in the uncertain future, comes nearer to his ultimate goal if he exchanges a less markctable good he wants to trade
against a more marlwable one. It may also happen that the physical
properties of the merchandise he wants to give away (as, for instance,
its perishability or the costs incurred by its storage or similar circumstances) impel him not to wait longer. Sometimes he may be prompted
to hurry in giving away the good concerned because he is afraid of
a deterioration of its market value. In all such cases he improves his
own situation in acquiring a more marketable good, even if this good
is not suitable to satisfy directly any of his own needs.
A medium of exchange is a good which people acquire neither for
their own consumption nor for employment in their own production
activities, but with the intention of exchanging it at a later date
against those goods which they want to use either for consumption
or for production.
Money is a medium of exchange. It is the most marketable good
which people acquire because they want to offer it in later acts of
interpersonal exchange. Money is the thing which serves as the generally accepted and commonly used medium of exchange. This is
its only function. All the other functions which people ascribe to
money are merely particular aspects of its primary and sole function,
that of a medium of e ~ c h a n g e . ~
Media of exchange are economic goods. They are scarce; there is
3. Cf. Mises, T h e Theory of Money and Credit, trans, by H . E. Batson (London and New York, 1934), pp. 34-37.

Indirect Exchange

3 99

a demand for them. There are on the rnarkct people who desire to
acquire them and are ready to exchange goods and services against
them. Media of exchange have value in exchange. People make sacrifices for their acquisition; they pay "prices" for them. The peculiarity
of these prices lies merely in the fact that they cannot be expressed
in terms of money. In reference to thc vendible goods and services
we speak of prices or of money prices. In reference to money we
speak of its purchasing power with regard to various vendible goods.
There exists a demand for media of exchange because people want
to keep a store of them. Every member of a rnarkct society wants to
have a definite amount of money in his pocket or box, a cash holding
or cash balance of a definite height. Sometimes he wants to keep a
larger cash holding, sometimes a smaller; in exceptional cases he may
even renouncc any cash holding. At any rate, the immense majority
of peoplc aim not only to own various vendible goods; they want no
less to hold money. Their cash holding is not merely a residuum, an
unspent margin of their wealth. It is not an unintentional remainder
left over after all intentiqnal acts of buying and selling havc been
consummated. Its amount is determined by a deliberate demand for
cash. And as with all othcr goods it is the changes in the relation
between demand for and supply of money that bring about changes
in the exchange ratio between money and the vendible goods.
Every piece of money is owned by one of the members of the
market economy. The transfer of money from the control of one
actor into that of another is temporally immediate and continuous.
There is no fraction of time in between in which the money is not a
pare of an individual's or a firm's cash holding, but just in "circulation." It is unsound to distinguish between circulating and idle
money. It is no lcss faulty to distinguish bctween circulating money
and hoarded money. What is called hoarding is a height of cash
holding which-according to the personal opinion of an observerexceeds what is deemed normal and adequate. However, hoarding
is cash holding. Hoarded money is sciil money and it serves in the
hoards the same purposes which it serves in cash holdings caIled normal. He who hoards money believes that some special conditions make
it expedicnt to accumulate a cash holding which exceeds the amount
he himself would keep under different conditions, or other people
keep, or an economist censuring his action considers appropriate.
That he acts in this way influences the configuration of the demand
4. Money can be in the process of transportation, it can travel in trains, ships,
or planes from one place t o another. But it is in this case, too, always subject to
control.

400

Human Action

for money in the same way in which every "normal" demand influences it.
Many economists avoid applying the terms demand and supply
in the sense of demand for and supply of money for cash hoIding
because they fear a confusion with the current terminology as used
by the bankers. It is, in fact, customary to call demand for money
the demand for short-term loans and supply of money the supply
of such loans. Accordingly one calls the market for short-term loans
the moncy market. One says money is scarce if there prevails a
tendency toward a rise in the rate of interest for short-term loans,
and one says money is plentiful if the rate of interest for such loans is
decreasing. These modes of speech are so firmly entrenched that it
is out of the question to venture to discard them. But they have
favored the spread of fateful errors. They made people confound the
notions of money and of capital and believe that increasing the
quantity of money could lower the rate of interest lastingly. But it is
preciseiy the crassness of thcsc errors which makes it unlikely that
the terminology suggested could create any misunderstanding. It is
hard to assume that economists could err with regard to such fundamental issues.
Ofhers maintained that one should not speak of the demand for and
supply of money because the aims of those demanding money differ
from the aims of those demanding vendible commodities. Commodities, they say, are demanded ultimately for consumption, while money
is demanded in ordcr to be given away in further acts of exchange.
This objection is no less invalid. The use which pcopIe make of a
medium of exchange consists eventually in its being given away. But
first of all they are eager to accumulate a certain amount of it in order
to be ready for the moment in which a purchase may be accomplished.
Precisely because people do not want to provide for their own needs
right at thc instant at which they give away the goods and services
they themselves bring to the market, precisely because they want to
wait or are forced to wait until propitious conditions for buying appear, they barter not directly but indirectly through the interposition of a medium of cxchange. The fact that money is not worn out
by the use one makes of it and that it can render its services practically
for an unlimited length of time is an important factor in the configuration of its supply. But it does not alter the fact that the appraisement
of money is to he explained in the same way as the appraisement of
a 1 other goods: by the demand on the part of those who are eager
to acquire a definite quantity of it.
Economists have tried to enumerate the factors which within the

Indirect Exchange

401

whole economic system may ilcrease or decrease the demand for
money. Such factors are: the population figure; the extent to which
the individual households provide for their own needs by autarkic
production and the extent to which they produce for other people's
needs, selling their products and buying for thcir own consumption
on the market; thc distribution of business activity and the settlement
of payments over the various seasons of the year; institutions for the
settlement of claims and counterclaims by mutual cancellation, such
as clearinghouses. All these factors indeed influence the demand for
money and the height of the various individuals' and firms' cash
holding. But they influence them only indirectly b y the role they
play in the considerations of people concerning the determination of
the amount of cash balances they deem appropriate. W h a t decides
thc matter is always the value judgments of the nien concerned. T h e
various actors make up their minds about what they believe the
adequate height of thcir cash holding should be. T h e y carry out
their resolution by renouncing the purchase of commodities, securities, and interest-bearing claims, and by selling such assets or conversely b y increasing their purchases. W i t h money, things are not
different from what they are with regard to all other goods and services. The demand for money is determined by the conduct of people
intent upon acquiring it for their cash holdink.
Another objection raised against the notion of the demand for
money was this: The marginal utility of the money unit decreases
much more slowly than that of the other commodities; in fact its
decrease is so slow that it can be practically ignored. With regard to
money nobody ever says that his demand is satisfied, and nobody ever
forsakes an opportunity to acquire more money provided the sacrifice
required is not too great. It is therefore impermissible to consider the
demand for money as limited. The very notion of an unlimited demand is, however, contradictory. This popular reasoning is cntirely
fallacious. I t confounds the demand for money for cash holding
.,with
the desire for more wealth as expressed in terms of money. H e who
says that his thirst for more money can never be quenched, does
not mean to say that his cash holding can never be too large. What
he really means is that he can never be rich enough. If additional
money flou7s into his hands, he will not use it for an increase of his
cash balance or he will use only a part of it for this purpose. H e will
expend the surplus either for instantaneous consumption or for investment. Nobody ever keeps more money than hc wants to have as
cash holding.
T h c insight that the exchange ratio between money on the one

402
H u m a n Action
hand and the vendible commodities and services on the other is determined, in the same way as the mutual cxchange ratios between the
various vendible goods, by demand and supply was the essence of the
quantity theory of money. This thcory is essentially an application of
the general theory of supply and demand to the special instance of
money. Its merit was the endcavor to explain the determination of
money's purchasing power by resorting to the same reasoning which
is cmployed for the explanation of all other exchange ratios. Its shortcorning was that it resorted to a holistic interpretation. I t looked at
the total supply of money in the Volkswirtschaft and not at the
actions of thc individual men and firn~s.An outgrowth of this erroneous point of view was the idea that there prevails a proportionality
in the changes of the-total-quantity of money and of moncy prices.
But the older critics failed in their attempts to explode the crrors
inherent in the quantity theory and to substitute a more satisfactory
theory for it. They did not fight what was wrong in the quantity
theory; they attacked, on the contrary, its nucleus of truth. T h e y
were intent upon denying that there is a causal relation between the
movements of prices and those of the quantity of moncy. This denial
led them into a labyrinth of errors, contradictions, and nonsense.
Modern monetary theory takes up the thread of the traditional quantity theory as far as it starts from the cognition that changes in the
pu-rchasing power of money must be dealt with according to the
principles applied to all other market phenomena and that there
exists a connection between the changes in the demand for and
supply of money on the one hand and those of purchasing power on
the other. In this sense one may call the modcrn theory of monev an
improved variety of the quantity theory.

T h e Epistemological Import of Carl Menger's Theory
of the Origin of Money
Carl Menger has not only provided an irrefutable praxeological theory
of the origin of money. H e has also recognized the import of his theory
for the elucidation of fundamental principles of praxeology and its
methods of research.5
There were authors who tried to explain the origin of moncy by decree
or covenant. The authority, the state, or a compact between citizens has
purposively and consciously established indirect exchangc and moncy. The
main deficiency of this doctrine is not to be seen in the assumption that
people of an age unfamiliar with indirect exchange and moncy could de5. Cf. Carl Menger's books Grundsiitze der Volkswirtschaftslehre (Vienna,
1871). pp. 25off.; ibid. (2d ed. Vienna, 19231, pp. 241 ff.; Untersuchungen iiber

die Methode der Sozialwissenschaften (I,eipzig, 188j), pp. 171 ff.

Indirect Exchange
sign a plan of a new economic order, entirely different from the real conditions of their own age, and could comprehend the importance of such a
plan. Neither is it to be seen in the fact that history does not afford a clue
for the support of such statements. There are more substantial reasons for
rejecting it.
If it is assumed that the conditions of the parties concerned are improved
by every step that leads from direct exchange to indirect exchange and
subsequently to giving preference for use as a medium of exchangc to certain goods distinguished by their especiaIly high marketability, it is difficult
to conceive why one should, in dealing with the origin of indirect exchange, resort in addition to authoritarian decree or an explicit compact
between citizens. A man who finds it hard to obtain in direct barter what
he wants t o acquire renders better his chances to acquire what he is asking
for in later acts of exchange by the procurement of a more marketable
good. Under these circumstances there was no need of government interference or of a compact between the citizens. The happy idea of proceeding in this way could strikc the shrewdest individuals, and the less resourceful could imitate the former's method. It is certainly more p1ausibIe to take
for granted that the immediate advantages conferred by indirect exchange
were recognized by the acting parties than to assume that the whole image
of a society trading by means of money was conceived by a genius and, if
we adopt the covenant doctrine, tnade obvious to the rest of the people
by persuasion.
If, however, we do not assume that individuals discovered the fact that
they fare better through indirect exchangc than through waiting for an
opportunity for direct exchange, and, for the sake of argument, admit that
the authorities or a compact introduced money, further questions are
raised. We must ask what kind of measures were applied in order to induce
people to adopt a procedure the utiiity of which they did not comprehend
and which was technically more complicated than direct exchange. W e
may assume that compulsion was practiced. But then we must ask, further,
n t what time and by what occurrences indirect exchange and the use of
money later ceased to be procedures troublesome or at least indifferent to
the individuals concerned and became advantageous to them.
The praxeological method traces all phenomena back t o the actions of
individuais. if conditions of interpersonal exchange are such that indirect
exchange facilitates the transactions, and if and as far as people realize these
advantages, indirect exchange and money come into being. Historical experience shows that these conditions were and are present. How, in the
absence of these conditions, people could have adopted indirect exchange
and money and clung to these modes of exchanging is inconceivable.
The historical question concerning the origin of indirect exchange and
money is after all of no concern t o praxeology. The only relevant thing is
that indirect exchange and money exist because the conditions for their
existence werc and are present. If this is so, praxeology does not need to
resort to the hypothesis that authoritarian decree or a covenant invented

404

Hunzan Action

these modes of exchanging. The ktatists may if they like continue to ascribe
the "invention" of money to the state, however unlikely this may be. What
matters is that a man acquires a good not in order to consume it or to use
it in production, but in order to give it away in a further act of exchange.
Such conduct on the part of people makes a good a medium of exchange
and, if such conduct beconles common with regard to a certain good, makes
it money. All theorems of the catallactic theory of media of exchange and
of money refer to the services which a good renders in its capacity as a
medium of exchange. Even if it were true that the impulse for the introduction of indirect exchange and money was provided by the authorities
or by an agreement between the members of society, the statement remains unshaken that only the conduct of exchanging people can create indirect exchange and money.
History may tell us where and when for the first time media of exchange
came into use and how, subsequently, the range of goods employed for this
purpose was more and more restricted. As the differentiation between the
broader notion of a medium of exchange and the narrower notion of
money is not sharp, but gradual, no agreement can be reached about the
historical transition from simple media of exchange to money. This is a
matter of historical understanding. But, as has been mentioned, the distinction between direct exchange and indirect exchange is sharp and everything that catallactics establishes with regard to media of exchange refers
categorially to all goods which are demanded and acquired as such media.
As far as the statement that indirect exchange and money were established by decree or by covenant is meant to be an account of historical
events, it is the task of historians to expose its falsity. As far as it is advanced
merely as a historical statement, it can in no way affect the catallactic
theory of money and its explanation of the evolution of indirect exchange.
But if it is designed as a statement about human action and social events, it
is useless because it states nothing about action. It is not a statement about
human action to declare that one day rulers or citizens assembled in convention were suddenly struck by the inspiration that it would be a good
idea t o exchange indirectly and through the intermediary of a commonly
used ~nediumof exchange. It is merely pushing back the problem involved.
It is necessary to comprehend that one does not contribute anything to
the scientific conception of human actions and social phenomena if one
declares that the state or a charismatic leader or an inspiration which descended upon all the people have created them. Neither do such statements
refute the teachings of a theory showing how such phenomena can be
aclrnowledged as "the unintentional outcome, the resultant not deliberately
designed and aimed at by specifically individual endeavors of the members
of a society."
6 . Cf. hknger, Untersuchungen, LC., p. 178.

Indirect Exchange

405

4. T h e Determination of the Purchasing Powcr of Money
As soon as an economic good is demanded not only by those who
want to use it for consumption or production, but also by people
who want to keep it as a medium of exchange and to give it away
at need in a later act of exchange, the demand for it increases. A new
employment for this good has emerged and creates an additional
demand for it. As with every other economic good, such an additional
demand brings about a rise in its value in exchange, i.e., in the quantity
of other goods which are offered for its acquisition. The amount of
other goods which can be obtained in giving away a medium of exchange, its "price" as expressed in terms of various goods and services,
is in part determined by the demand of those who want to acquire
it as a medium of exchange. If people stop using the good in question
as a medium of exchange, this additional specific demand disappears
and the "price" drops concomitantly.
Thus the dernand for a medium of exchange is the composite of
two partial demands: the demand displayed by the intention to use
it in consumption and production and that displayed by the intention
t o use it as a medium of ~ x c h a n g e . ~
With regard to modern metalIic
money one speaks of the industrial demand and of the monetary demand. T h e vaIue in exchange (purchasing power) of a medium of
exchange is the resultant of the cumulative effect of both partial demands.
Now the extent of that part of the demand for a medium of exchange which is displayed on account of its service as a medium of
exchange depends on its value in exchange. This fact raises difficulties
which many economists considered insoluble so that they abstained
from following farther along this line of reasoning. I t is illogical, they
said, to explain the purchasing pourer of money by reference to the
demand for money, and the demand for money by reference to its
purchasing power.
T h e difficulty is, however, merely apparent. T h e purchasing power
which we explain by referring to the extent of specific demand is not
the same purchasing power the height of which determines this
specific demand. T h e problem is to conceive the determination of the
purchasing power of the immediate future, of the impending moment. For the solution of this problem we refer to the purchasing
pourer of the immediate past, of the moment just passed. These are
7. The problems of money exclusively dedicated to the service of a medium of
exchange and not fit to render any other services on account of which it would
be demanded are dealt with beIow in section 9.

406
Human Action
two distinct magnitudes. I t is erroneous to object to our theorem,
which may be called the regression theorem, that it moves in a
vicious circle.*
But, say the critics, this is tantamount to merely pushing back the
problem. For now one must still explain the determination of yesterday's purchasing power. If one explains this in the same way by
referring to the purchasing power of the day before yesterday and
so on, one slips into a r e g m s u s in infinitzdnz. This reasoning, they assert, is certainly not a complete and logically satisfactory solution
of the problem involved. What these critics fail to see is that the
regression does not go back endlessly. It reaches a point at which the
explanation is completed and no further question remains unanswered.
If we trace the purchasing power of money back step by step, we
finally arrive at the point at which the service of the good concerned
as a medium of exchange begins. At this point yesterday's exchange
vaIuc is exclusively determined by the nonmonetary-industrialdemand which is displayed only by those who want to use this good
for other employments than that df a medium of exchange.
But, the critics continue, this means explaining that part of money's
purchasing power which is due to its service as a medium of exchange by its employment for industria1 purposes. The very probIem,
the explanation of the specific monetary component of its exchange
value, remains unsolved. Here too the critics are mistaken. That
component of money's vaIue which is an outcome of the services
it renders as a medium of exchange is entirely explained by reference
to these specific monetary services and the demand they create. Two
facts are not to be denied and are not denied by anybody. First, that
the demand for a medium of exchange is determined by considerations
of its exchange value which is an outcome both of the monetary and
the industrial services it renders. Second, that thc exchange value of
3 good which has not yet been demanded for service as a medium of
exchange is determined solely by a demand on the part of people
eager to use it for industrial purposes, ix., either for consumption or
for production. Now, the regression theorem aims at interpreting the
8. T h e present writer first developed this regression theorem of purchasing
power in the first edition of his book Theory of Money and Credit, published in
1912 (pp. 97-123 of the English-language translation). His theorem has been
criticized from various points of view. Some of the objections raised, especially
those by B. Ail. Anderson in his thoughtful book T h e Value of Noney, first published in 1917 (cf. pp. loo ff. of the 1936 edition), dcscrve a very careful examination. T h e importance of the problems involved makes it necessary to weight also
the objections of H. Ellis (German Monetary TI~eoryZ Y O J - ~ Y ~ ~
[Cambridge,
19341, pp. 77 ff.). In the text above, all objections raised are particularized and
critically examined.

Indirect Exchange

407

first emergence of a monetary demand for a good which previously
had been demanded exclusively for industrial purposes as influenced
by the exchange value that was ascribed to it at this moment on account of its nonmonetary services only. This certainly does not involve explaining the specific monetary exchange value of a medium
of exchange on the ground of its industrial exchange value.
Finally it was objected to the regression theorem that its approach
is historical, not theoretical. This objection is no less mistaken. T o
explain an event historically means to show how it was produced by
forces and factors operating at a definite date and a definite place.
These individual forces and factors are the ultimate elements of the
interpretation. They are ultimate data and as such not open to any
further analysis and reduction. T o explain a phenomenon theoretica11y
means to trace back its appearance to the operation of general rules
which are already comprised in the theoretical system. The regression
theorem complies with this requirement. It traces the specific exchange value of a medium of exchange back to its function as such a
medium and to the theorems concerning the process of valuing and
pricing as developed b y the general catallactic theory. It deduces
a more special case from the rules of a more universal theory. It
shows how the special phenomenon necessarily emerges out of the
operation of the rules generally valid for all phenomena. It docs not
say: This happened at that timc and at that place. It says: This always
happens when the conditions appear; whenever a good which has
not been demanded previously for the employment as a medium of
exchange, begins to be demanded for this employment, the same
effects must appear again; no good can be employed for the function
of a medium of exchange which at the very beginning of its use for
this purpose did not have exchange value on account of other employments. And all these statements implied in the regression theorem
are enounced apodictically as implied in the apriorism of praxeology.
It m s t happen this way. Nobody can ever succeed in constructing
a hypothetical case in which things were to occur in a different way.
The purchasing power of money is determined by demand and supply, as is the case with the prices of a11 vendible goods and services.
As action always aims at a more satisfactory arrangement of future
conditions, he who considers acquiring or giving away money is, of
course, first of all interested in its future purchasing power and the
future structure of prices. But he cannot form a judgment about the
future purchasing power of money otherwise than by looking at its
configuration in the immediate past. It is this fact that radically distinguishes the determination of the purchasing power of money from

408
Human Action
the determination of the mutual exchange ratios between the various
vendible goods and services. With regard to these latter the actors
have nothing else to consider than their importance for future tvantsatisfaction. If a new commodity unheard of before is offered for
sale, as was, for instance, the case with radio sets a few decades ago,
the only question that matters for the individual is whether or not
the satisfaction that the new gadget will provide is greater than that
expected from those goods he would have to renounce in order to
buy the new thing. Knowledge about past prices is for the buyer
merely a means to reap a consumer's surplus. If he were not intent
upon this goal, he could, if nced be, arrange his purchases without
any familiarity with the market prices of the immediate past, which
are popularly callcd present prices. H e could make value judgments
without appraisement. As has been mentioned already, the obliteration of the memory of all prices of the past would not prevent the
formation of new exchange ratios between the various vendible things.
But if knowledge about money's purchasing power were to fade
away, the process of developing indirect exchange and media of exchange would have to start anew. It wouId become necessary to
begin again with employing some goods, more marketable than the
rest, as media of exchange. The demand for these goods would increase and would add to the amount of exchange value derived from
their industrial (nonmonetary) employmcnt a specific component due
to their new use as a medium of exchange. A value judgment is, with
reference to money, only possible if it can be based on appraisement.
The acceptance of a new kind of money presupposes that the thing
in question already has previous exchange value on account of the
scrviccs it can render directly to consumption or production. Ncither
a buyer nor a seller could judge the value of a monetary unit if hc had
no information about its exchange value-its purchasing power-in
the immediate past.
The relation between the demand for money and the supply of
money, which may be caiicd the money reiation, deterrnincs tile
height of purchasing power. Today's money relation, as it is shaped
on the ground of yesterday's purchasing power, determines today's
purchasing power. He who wants to increase his cash holding restricts
his purchases and increases his sales and thus brings about a tendency
toward falling prices. He who wants to reduce his cash holding
increases his purchases-either for consumption or for production
and investment-and restricts his sales; thus he brings about a tendency
toward rising prices.
Changes in the supply of money must necessarily alter the dis-

Indirect Exchange

409

position of vendible goods as owned by various individuals and firms.
The quantity of money available in the whole market system cannot:
increase or decrease otherwise than by first increasing or decreasing
the cash holdings of certain individual members. Wc may, if we like,
assume that every member gets a share of the additional money right
at the momcnt of its inflow into the system, or shares in the reduction
of the quantity of money. But whether we assume this or not, the
final result of our demonstration will remain the same. This rcsult
will be that changes in the structure of prices brought about by
changes in the supply of money available in the cconomic system
ncvcr affect the prices of the various commodities and services to
the same extent and at the same date.
Let us assume that the government issues an additional quantity
of paper money. The government plans either to b ~ i ycommodities
and services or to repay debts incurred or to pay interest on such
debts. However this may be, the treasury enters the market with an
additional demand for goods and services; it is now in a position to
buy more goods than it could buy before. The prices of the cornmodities it buys rise. If the government had expended in its purchases
money collected by taxation, the taxpayers would have restricted
their purchases and, while the prices of the goods bought by the
government would have risen, those of other goods would have
dropped. But this fall in the prices of the goods the taxpayers used
to buy does not occur if the government increases the quantity of
money at its disposal without reducing the quantity of money in
the hands of the public. The prices of some commodities-viz., of
those the govcrnment buys-rise immediately, while those of the
other commoditics remain unaltered for the time being-. But the process
goes on. Those selling the conmodities asked for by the government
are now themselves in a position to buy more than they used previously. The prices of the things these people are buying in larger
quantities therefore rise too. Thus the boom spreads from one group
of commodities and services to other groups until all prices and wage
rates have risen. The rise in prices is thus not synchronous with the
various commoditics and services.
When eventually, in the further course of the increase in the quantity of money, all prices have risen, the rise does not affect the various
commodities and services to the same extent. For the process has
affected the material position of various individuals to different degrees. While the process is under way, some peopIe enjoy the henefit of higher prices for the goods or services they sell, while the prices
of the things they buy have not yet risen or have not risen to the same

4'0
Human Action
extent. On the other hand, there are peopIe who are in the unhappy
situation of selling commodities and services whose prices have not
yet risen or not in the same degree as the prices of the goods they
must buy for their daily consumption. For the former the progressive
rise in priccs is a boon, for the latter a calamity. Besides, the debtors
are favored at the expense of the creditors. When the process once
comes to an end, the wealth of various individuals has been affected
in different ways and to different degrees. Some are enriched, some
impoverished. Conditions are no longer what they were before. The
new order of things results in changes in the intensity of demand for
various goods. The mutual ratio of the monev prices of the vendible
goods and services is no longer the same as before. The price structure has changed apart from the fact that all prices in terms of money
have risen. The final prices to the establishment of which the market
tends after the effects of the increase in the quantity of monep havk
been fully consumn~atedare not equal to the previous final prices
multiplied by the same multiplier.
T h e main fault of the old quantity theory as well as the mathematical economists' equation of exchange isvthat they have ignored
this fundamental issue. Changes in the supply of money must bring
about changes in other data too. The market system before and after
the inflow or outflow of a quantity of money is not merely changed
in that the cash holdings of the individuals and prices have increased
or decreased. There have been effected also changes in the reciprocal
exchange ratios bctwecn the various commodities and services which,
if one wants to resort to metaphors, are more adequately described
by the image of price revolution than by the misleading figure of
an elevation or a sinking of the price level.
W e may at this point disregard the effects brought about by the
influence on the content of all defcrred payments as stipulated by
contracts. W e will deal later with them and with the operation of
monetary events on consumption and production, investment in
capital goods, and accumulation and consumption of capital. But
even in setting asidc all these things, we must never forget that changes
in the quantity of money affect prices in an uneven way. I t depends
on the data of each particular case at what moment and to what extent the prices of the various commodities and services are affected.
In the course of a monetary expansion (inflation) the first reaction
is not only that the prices of some of them rise more quickly and more
steeply than others. It may also occur that some fall at first as they are
for the most part demanded by those groups whose interests are hurt.
Changes in the money relation are not onIy caused by governments

Indirect Exchange

411

issuing additional paper money. An increase in the production of the
precious metals employed as money has the same effects although, of
course, other classes of the population may be favored or hurt by it.
Prices also rise in the same way if, without a corresponding reduction
in the quantity of money available, the demand for money falls because of a general tendency toward a diminution of cash holdings.
T h e money expended additionally by such a "dishoarding" brings
about a tendency toward higher prices in the same way as that flowing
from the gold mines or from the printing press. Conversely, prices
drop when the supply of money falls (e.g., through a withdrawal of
paper money) or the demand for money increases (e.g., through a
tendency toward "hoarding," the keeping of greater cash balances).
T h e process is aIways uneven and by steps, disproportionate and
asymmetrical.
It could be and has been objected that the normal production of the
gold mines brought to the market may well entail an increase in the
quantity of money, but does not increase the income, still less the
wealth, of the owners of the mines. These people earn only their
"normal" income and thus their spending of it cannot disarrange
market conditions and the prevailing tendencies toward the establishment of final prices and the equilibrium of the evenly rotating
economy. For them, the annual output of the mines does not mean
an increase in riches and does not impel them to offer higher prices.
They will continue to live at the standard at which they used to
live before. Their spending within these limits will not revolutionize
the market. Thus the normal amount of gold production, although
certainly increasing the quantity of money available, cannot put
into motion the process of depreciation. It is neutral with regard to
prices.
As against this reasoning one must first of all obscrve that within
a progressing economy in which population figures are increasing
and the division of labor and its corollary, industrial specialization,
are perfected, there prevaiis a tendency toward an increase in the
demand for money. Additional people appear on the scene and want
to establish cash holdings. The extent of economic self-sufficiency,
i.e., of production for the household's own needs, shrinks and peoplc
become more dependent upon the market; this will, by and large,
impel them to increase their holding of cash. Thus the price-raising
tendency emanating from what is called the "normal" gold production encounters a price-cutting tendency emanating from the increased demand for cash holding. However, these two opposite tendencies do not neutralize each other. Both processes take their own

412

Human Action

course, both result in a disarrangement of existing social conditions,
making some people richer, some people poorer. Both affect the prices
of various goods at different dates and to a different degree. It is true
that the rise in the prices of some commodities caused by one of these
processes can finally be compensated by the fall caused by the other
process. It may happen that at the end some or many prices come
back to their previous height. But this final result is not the outcome
of an absence of movements provoked by changes in the money relation. It is rather the outcome of the joint effect of the coincidence of
two processes independent of each other, each of which brings about
alterations in the market data as well as in the material conditions of
various individuals and groups of individuals. T h e new- structure of
prices may not differ very much from the previous one. But it is
the resultant of two series of changes which have accomplished all
inherent social transformations.
T h e fact that the owners of gold mines rely upon steady yearly
proceeds from their gold production does dot cancel the newly
mined gold's impression upon prices. The owners of the mines talie
from the market, in exchange for the gold produced, the goods and
services required for their mining and the goods needed for their
consumption and their investments in other lines of production. If
they had not produced this amount of gold, prices would not have
been affected by it. It is beside the point that they have anticipated
the future yield of the mines and capitalized it and that they have
adjusted their standard of living to the expectation of steady proceeds
from the mining operations. The effects which the newly mined
gold exercises on their expenditure and on that of those people whose
cash holdings step by step it enters later begin only at the instant this
gold is available in the hands of the mine owners. If, in the expectation
of funire yields, they had expended money at an earlicr date and the
expected yield failed to appear, conditions would not differ from
other cases in which consumption was financed by credit based on
expectations not realized by later events.
Changes in the extent ofthe desired cash holding of various people
neutralize one another only to the extcnt that they are regularly recurring and mutually connected by a causal reciprocity. Salaried
people and wage earners are not paid daily, but at certain pay days
for a period of one or several weeks. They do not pIan to keep their
cash holding within the period between pay days at the same level;
the amount of cash in their pockets declines with the approach of the
next pay day. On the other hand, the merchants who supply them
with the necessities of life increase their cash holdings concomitantly.

Indirect Exchange

413

T h e two movements condition each other; there is a causal interdependence between them which harmonizes them both with rcgard to
time and t o quantitative amount. Neither the dealer nor his customer
lets himself be influenced by these recurrent fluctuations. Their
plans concerning cash holding as well as their business operations
and their spending for consumption respectively have the whole
period in view and take it into account as a whole.
I t was this phenomenon that led economists to the image of a
regular circulation of money and to the tleglect of the changes in the
individuals' cash holdings. However, we are faced with a concatenation which is limited to a narrow, neatly circumscribed field. Only
as far as the increase in the cash holding of one group of people is
ten~porally and quantitatively related to the decrease in the cash
holding of another group and as far as these changes are self-liquidating
within the course of a period which the members of both groups
consider as a whole in planning their cash holding, can thc neutralization take place. Beyond this fieId there is no question of such a
neutralization.

5 . T h e Problem of Hume and Mi11 and the Driving
Force of Money
Is it possibie to think of a state of affairs in which changes in the
purchasing power of money occur at the same time and to the same
extent with regard to all commodities and services and in proportion
to the changes effected in either the demand for or the supply of
money? In other words, is it possible to think of neutral money within
the frame of an economic system which does not correspond to the
imaginary construction of an evenly rotating economy? W e may
call this pertinent question the problem of Hume and Mill.
It is uncontested that neither Ilume nor Mill succeeded in finding
a positive answer to this question."^ it possible to answer it categorically in the negative?
W e imagine two systems of an evenly rotating economy A and B.
The two systems are independent and in no way connected with one
another. T h e two systems differ from one another only in the fact
that to each amount of money nz in A there corresponds an amount
n m in B, n being greater or smaller than I ; we assume that there are
no deferred paynlents and that the money used in both systems serves
only monetary purposes and does not allow of any nonmonetary use.
Consequently the prices in the two systems are in the ratio I : n. Is it

-

9. Cf. Mises, Theory of Money and Credit, pp. 140-142.

414
Human Action
thinkable that conditions in A can be altered at one stroke in such a
way as to make them entirely equivalent to conditions in B?
The answer to this question must obviously be in the negative. H e
who wants to answer it in the positive must assume that a deus ex
nzacbina approaches every individual at the same instant, increases
or decreases his cash holding by multiplying it by n, and tells him that
henceforth he must multiply by n a11 price data which he employs in
his appraisements and calculations. This cannot happen without a
miracle.
It has been pointed out already that in the imaginary construction
of an evenly rotating economy the very notion of moncy vanishes
into an unsubstantial calculation process, self-contradictory and devoid of any meaning.1° It is impossible to assign any function to indirect exchange, media of exchange, and money within an imaginary
construction the characteristic mark of which is unchangeability and
rigidity of conditions.
Where there is no uncertainty concerning the future, there is no
need for any cash holding. As money must necessarily be kept by
people in their cash holdings, there cannot be any money. The use of
media of exchange and the keeping of cash holdings are conditioned
by the changeability of economic data. Money in itself is an element
of change; its existence is incompatible with the idea of a regular flow
of events in an evenly rotating economy.
Every change in the money relation alters-apart from its effects
upon deferred payments-the conditions of the individual members
of society. Some become richer, some poorer. It may happen that the
effects of a change in the demand for and supply of money encounter
the effects of opposite changes occurring by and large at the same
time and to the same extent; it may happen that the resultant of the
two opposite movements is such that no conspicuous changes in the
price structure emerge. But even then the efFects on the conditions
of the various individuals are not absent, Each change in the money
relation takcs its own course and produces its own particular effects.
If an inflationary movement and a deflationary one occur at the same
time or if an inflation is temporally followed by a deflation in such a
way that prices finally are not very much changed, the social consequences of each of the two movements do not cancel each other. T o
the social consequences of an inflation those of a deflation are added.
There is no reason to assume that all or even most of those favored by
one movement will be hurt by the second one, or vice versa.
Money is neither an abstract numthire nor a standard of value or
10.

Cf. above, pp. 249-250.

Indirect Exchange

4x5

prices. It is necessarily an economic good and as such it is valued and
appraised on its own merits, i.e., the services which a man expects
from holding cash. On the market there is always change and movemcnt. Only because there are fluctuations is there money. Money is
an element of change not because it "circulates," but because it is
kept in cash holdings. Only because people expect changes about the
kind and extent of which thcy have no certain knowledge whatsoever, do they keep money.
While money can be thought of only in a changing economy, it is
in itself an element of further changes. Every change in the economic
data sets it in motion and makes it the driving force of new changes.
Every shift in the mutual relation of the exchange ratios between the
various nonmonetary goods not only brings about changes in production and in what is popularly called distribution, but also provokes
changes in the money relation and thus further changes. Nothing
can happen in the orbit of vendible goods without affecting the orbit
of money, and all that happens in the orbit of money affects the orbit
of commodities.
The notion of a neutral money is no less contradictory than that
of a money of stable purchasing power. Money without a driving
force of its own would not, as people assume, be a perfect
money; it would not bc moncy at all.
I t is a popular fallacy to believe that perfect money should be
neutral and endowed with unchanging purchasing powcr, and that
the goal of monetary policy should he to realize this perfect money.
It is easy to understand this idea as a reaction against the stiIl more
popular postulates of the inflationists. But it is an excessive reaction,
it is in itself confused and contradictory, and it has worked havoc because it was strengthened by an inveterate error inherent in the
thought of many philosophers and economists.
These thinkers are misled by the widespread belief that a state of
rest is more perfect than one of movement. Their idea of perfection
implies that no more perfect state can be thought of and consequently
that every change would impair it. The best that can be said of a
motion is that it is directed toward the attainment of a state of perfection in which there is rest because every further movement would
lead into a less perfect state. Motion is seen as the absence of equilibrium and full satisfaction, as a manifestation of trouble and want.
As far as such thoughts merely establish the fact that action aims at
the removal of uneasiness and ultimately at the attainment of fulI
satisfaction, they are well foundcd. But one must not forget that rest
and equilibrium are not only present in a state in which perfect con-

416
Human Action
tentment has made people perfectly happy, but no less in a state in
which, although wanting in many regards, they do not see any means
of improving their condition. The absence of action is not only the
result of full satisfaction; it can no less be the corollary of the inability
to render things more satisfactory. It can mean hopelessness as well
as contentment.
With the real universe of action and unceasing change, with the
economic system which cannot be rigid, neither neutrality of money
nor stability of its purchasing power are compatible. A world of the
kind which the necessary requirements of neutral and stable money
presuppose would be a world without action.
It is therefore neither strange nor vicious that in the frame of such
a changing world money is neither neutral nor stable in purchasing
power. All plans to render money neutral and stable are contradictory. Money is an element of action and consequentIy of change.
Changes in the money relation, i t . , in the relation of the demand for
and the supply of money, affect the exchange ratio between money
on the one hand and the vendible commodities on the other hand.
These changes do not affect at the same time and to the same extent
the prices of the various commodities and services. They consequently affect the wealth of the various members of society in a different way.

6. Cash-Induced and Goods-Induced Changes in
Purchasing Power
Changes in the purchasing power of money, i.e., in the exchange
ratio between money and the vendible goods and commodities, can
originate either from the side of money or from the side of the vendible goods and commodities. The change in the data which provokes
them can either occur in the demand for and supply of money or in
the demand for and supply of the other goods and services. W e may
accordingly distinguish between cash-induced and goods-induced
changes in purchasing power.
Goods-induced changes in purchasing power can be brought about
by changes in the supply of commodities and services or in the demand for individual commodities and services. A general rise or fall
in the demand for a11 goods and services or the greater part of them
can be effected only from the side of money.
Let us now scritinize the social and economic consequences of
changes in the purchasing power of money under the following three
assumptions: first, that the money in question can only be used as

Indirect Exchange

417

money-ix., as a medium of exchange-and can serve no other purpose; second, that there is only exchange of present goods and no
exchange of present goods against future goods; third, that we disregard the effects of changes in purchasing power on monetary calculation.
Under these assumptions a11 that cash-induced changes in purchasing power bring about are shifts in the disposition of wealth among
different individuals. Some get richer, others poorer; some are better
supplied, others less; what some people gain is paid for by the loss of
others. I t would, however, be impermissible to interpret this fact by
saying that total satisfaction remained unchanged or that, while no
changes have occurred in total supply, the state of total satisfaction
or of the sum of happiness has been increased or decreased by changes
in the distribution of wealth. The notions of total satisfaction or total
happiness are empty. It is impossible to discover a standard for comparing the different degrees of satisfaction or happiness attained by
various individuals.
Cash-induced changes in purchasing power indirectly generate
further changes by favoring either the accumulation of additional
capital or the consumption of capital avaiIable. Whether and in what
direction such secondary effects arc brought about depends on the
specific data of each case. W e shall deal with these important problems
at a later point.ll
Goods-induced changes in purchasing power are sometimes nothing else but consequences of a shift of demand from somc goods to
others. If they are brought about by an increase or a decrease in the
supply of goods they are not merely transfers from some people to
other people. They do not mean that Peter gains what Paul has lost.
Some people m a i become richer although nobody is impoverished,
and vice versa.
We may describe this fact in the following way: Let A and B be
two independent systems which are in no way connected with each
other. In both systcms the same kind of money is used, a money which
cannot be used for any nonmonetary purpose. Now we assume, as
case I , that A and B differ from each other only in so far as in B the
total supply of money is 12 nz, m being the total supply of money in
A, and thar to every cash holding of c and to every claim in terms
of money d in A there corresponds a cash holding of n c and a claim
of n d in B. In every other respect A equals B. Then we assume, as
case 2 , that A and B differ from each other only in so far as in B the
total supply of a certain commodity r is n p, p being the total supply
11.

Cf. below, Chapter XX.

418
Human Actiofz
of this commodity in A, and that to every stock v of this commodity r
in A there corresponds a stock of n v in B. In both cases n is greater
than I . If we ask every individual of A whether he is ready to make
the slightest sacrifice in order to exchange his position for the corresponding place in B, the answer will be unanimously in the negative
in case I . But in case z all owners of r and all those who do not own
any r, but are eager to acquire a quantity of it-i.e., at least one individual-will answer in the affirmative.
The services money renders are conditioned by the height of its
purchasing power. Nobody wants to have in his cash holding a definite
number of pieces of money or a definite weight of money; he wants
to keep a cash holding of a definite amount of purchasing power. As
the operation of the market tends to determine the final state of
money's purchasing power at a height at which the supply of and
the dcmand for money coincide, there can never be an excess or a
deficiency of money. Each individual and all individuals together
always enjoy fully the advantages which they can derive from indirect exchange and the use of money, no matter whether the total
quantity of money is great or small. Changes in money's purchasing
power generate changes in the disposition of wealth among the various
members of society. From the point of view of people eager to be
enriched by such changes, the supply of money may be called insufficient or excessive, and the appetite for such gains may result in
policies designed to bring about cash-induced alterations in purchasing power. However, the services which money renders can be
neither improved nor impaired by changing the supply of money.
There may appear an excess or a deficiency of money in an individual's cash holding. But such a condition can be remedied by increasing or decreasing consumption or investment. (Of course, one must
not fall prey to the popular confusion between the demand for money
for cash hilding and the appetite for more wealth.) The quantity of
money available in the whole economy is always sufficient to secure
for everybody all that money does and can do.
From the point of view of this insight one may call wasteful all
expenditures incurred for increasing the quantity of money. The
fact that things which could render some other useful services are
employed as money and thus withheld from these other employments
appears as a superfluous curtailment of Iimited opportunities for
want-satisfaction. I t was this idea that led Adam Smith and Ricardo
to the opinion that it was very beneficial to reduce the cost of producing money by resorting to the use of paper printed currency.
However, things appear in a different light to the students of mone-

Indirect Exchange

419

tary history. If one looks at the catastrophic consequences of the
great paper money inflations, one must admit that the expensiveness
of gold production is the minor evil. It would be futile to retort that
these catastrophes were brought about by the improper use which
the governments made of the powers that credit money and fiat money
pIaced in their hands and that wiser governments would have adopted
sounder policies. As money can never be neutral and stable in purchasing power, a government's plans concerning the determination
of the quantity of money can never be impartial and fair to all members of society. Whatever a government does in the pursuit of aims
to influence the height of purchasing power depends necessarilv upon
the rulers' personal value judgments. I t always furthers the interests
of some groups of people at the expense of other groups. It never
serves what is called the commonweal or the public weIfare. In the
field of monetary policies too there is no such thing as a scientifir
ought.
The choice of the good to be employed as a medium of exchange
and as money is never indifferent. I t determines the course of the
cash-induced changes in purchasing power. T h e question is only
who should make the choice: the people buying and selling on the
market, o r the government? I t was the market w-hich in a selective
process, going on for ages, finally assigned to the precious metals
gold and silver the character of money. For two hundred years the
governments have interfered with the market's choice of the money
medium. Even the most bigoted Ctatists do not venture to assert that
this interference has proved beneficial.

Inflation and Deflation; Inflationism and Depntionism
The notions of inflation and deflation are not praxeological concepts.
They were not created by economists, but by the mundane speech of the
public and of politicians. They impIied the popular fallacy that there is such
a thing as neutral money or money of stabIe purchasing power and that
sound money should be neutral and stable in purchasing power. From this
point of view the term inflation was applied to signify cash-induced
changes resulting in a drop in purchasing power, and the term deflation to
signify cash-induced changes resulting in a rise in purchasing power.
However, those applying these terms are not aware of the fact that
purchasing power never remains unchanged and that consequently there
is always either inflation or deflation. They ignore these necessarily perpetual fluctuations as far as they are only small and inconspicuous, and
reserve the use of the terms to big changes in purchasing power. Since the
question as to at what point a change in purchasing power begins to deserve
being called big depends on personal relevance judgments, it becomes

420

Human Action

manifest that inflation and deflation are terms lacking the categorial
precision required for praxeoIogica1, economic, and catallactic concepts.
Their application is appropriate for history and politics. Catallactics is free
to resort to them only when applying its theorems to the interpretation of
events of economic history and of political programs. Moreover, it is very
expedient even in rigid catallactic disquisitions to make use of these two
terms whenever no misinterpretation can possibly result and pedantic
heaviness of expression can be avoided. But it is necessary never to forget
that all that catallactics says with regard to inflation and deflation-i.e., big
cash-induced changes in purchasing power-% valid also with regard to
small changes, although, of course, the consequences of smaller changes are
less conspicuous than those of big changes.
The terms inflationism and deflationism, inflationist and deflationist,
signify the poIitica1 programs aiming at inflation and deflation in the sense
of big cash-induced changes in purchasing power.
The semantic revolution which is one of the characteristic features of
our day has also changed the traditional connotation of the terms inflation
and deflation. What many people today call inflation or deflation is no
longer the great increase or decrease in the supply of money, but its inexorable consequences, the general tendency toward a rise or a fall in commodity prices and wage rates. This innovation is by no means harmless. It
plays an important role in fomenting the popular tehdencies toward inflationism.
First of all there is no longer any term available to signify what inflation
used to signify. It is impossible to fight a policy which you cannot name.
Statesmen and writers no longer have the opportunity of resorting to a terminology accepted and understood by the public when they want to question the expediency of issuing huge amounts of additional money. They
must enter into a detailed analysis and description of this policy with full
particulars and minute accounts whenever they want to refer to it, and
they must repeat this bothersome procedure in every sentence in which
they deal with the subject. As this policy has no name, it becomes selfunderstood and a matter of fact. It goes on luxuriantly.
T h e second mischief is that those engaged in futile and hopeless attempts
to fight the inevitable consequences of inflation-the rise in prices-are
disguising their endeavors as a fight against inflation. While merely fighting symptoms, they pretend to fight the root causes of the evil. Because
they do not comprehend the causal relation betw-een the increase in the
quantity of money on the one hand and the rise in prices on the other, they
practicalIy make things worse. T h e best example was provided by the subsidies granted on the part of the governments of the United States, Canada,
and Great Britain to farmers. Price ceilings reduce the supply of the commodities concerned because production involves a loss for the marginal
producers. T o prevent this outcome the governments granted subsidies to
the farmers producing at the highest costs. These subsidies were financed
out of additional increases in the quantity of money. If the consumers had

lndirect Exchange

421

had to pay higher prices for the products concerned, no further inflationary effects would have emerged. The consumers would have had to use for
such surplus expenditure only money which had already been issued previously. Thus the confusion of inflation and its consequences in fact can
directly bring about more inflation.
It is obvious that this new-fangled connotation of the terms inflation and
deflation is utterly confusing and misleading and must be unconditionally
rejected.

7. Monetary Calculation and Changes in Purchasing Power
Monetary calculation reckons with the prices of commodities and
services as they were determined or would have been determined
or presumably will be determined on the market. It is eager to detect
price discrepancies and to draw conclusions from such a detection.
Cash-induced changes in purchasing power cannot be taken into
account in such calculations. It is possible to put in the place of calculation based on a definite kind of money a a mode of calculating
based on another kind of money b. Then the result of the calculation
is made safe against adulteration on the part of changes effected in
the purchasing power of a; but it can still be adulterated by changes
effected in the purchasing power of b. There is no means of freeing
any mode of economic calculation from the influence of changes in
the purchasing power of the definite kind of money on which it is
based.
All results of economic calculation and all conclusions derived
from them are conditioned by the vicissitudes of cash-induced changes
in purchasing power. In accordance with the rise or fall in purchasing
power there emerge between items reflecting earlier prices and those
reflecting later prices specific diffcrences; the calculus shows profits or
losses which are mercly produced by cash-induced changes effected
in the purchasing power of money. If we compare such profits or
losses with the result of 3 calculation accomplished on the basis of a
kind of money whose purchasing power had been subject to less
vehement changes, we can call them imaginary or apparent only.
But o m must not forget that such statements are only possible as a
result of the comparison of calculations carried out in different kinds
of money. As there is no such thing as a money with stable purchasing pourer, such apparent profits and losses are present with every
mode of economic calculation, no matter on what kind of money it
may be based. It is in~possibleto distinguish precisely between genuine
profits and losses and merely apparent profits and losses.
It is therefore possible to maintain that economic calculation is

422

Human Action

not perfect. However, nobody can suggest a method which could
free economic calculation from these defects or design a monetary
system which could remove this source of error entirely.
It is an undeniable fact that the free market has succeeded in developing a currency system which well served all the requirements
both of indirect cxchange and of economic calculation. The aims of
monetary calculation are such that thcy cannot be frustrated by the
inaccuracies which stem from slow and comparatively slight movements in purchasing power. Cash-induced changes in purchasing
power of the extent to which they occurred in the last two centuries
with metallic money, expecially with gold money, cannot influence
the result of the businessmen's economic calculations so considerably
as to render such calculations useless. Historical experience shows that
one could, for all practical purposes of the conduct of business, manage very well with these methods of calculation. Theoretical consideration shows that it is impossible to design, still less to realize, a
better method. In view of these facts it is vain to call monetary calculation imperfect. Man has not the power to change the categories
of human action. He must adjust his conduct to them.
Businessmen never dcemed it necessary to free economic calculation in terms of gold from its dependence on the fluctuations in purchasing power. T h e proposals to improve the currency system by
adopting a tabular standard based on index numbers or by adopting
various methods of commodity standards were not advanced with
regard to business transactions and to monetary calculation. Their
aim was to provide a less fluctuating standard for long-run loan
contracts. Businessmen did not even consider it expedient to modify
their accounting methods in those regards in which it would have been
easy to narrow down certain errors induced by fluctuations in purchasing power. It would, for instance, have been possible to discard
the practice of writing off durable equipment by means of yearly
depreciation quotas, invariably fixed in a percentage of the cost of
its acquisition. In its place one could resort to the device of laying
aside in renewal funds as much as seems necessary to provide the full
costs of the replacement at the time when it is required. But business
was not eager to adopt such a procedure.
All this is valid only with regard to money which is not subject
to rapid, big cash-induced changes in purchasing power. But money
with which such rapid and big changes occur loses its suitability to
serve as a medium of exchange altogether.

lndirect Exchange
8. T h e Anticipation of Expected Changes in
Purchasing Power
The deliberations of the individuals which determine their conduct with regard to money are based on their knowledge concerning
the prices of the immediate past. If they lacked this knowledge, they
would not be in a position to decide what the appropriate height
of their cash holdings should be and how much they should spend for
the acquisition of various goods. A medium of exchange without a
past is unthinkable. Nothing can enter into the function of a medium
of exchange which was not already previously an economic good and
to which people assigned exchange value already before it was demanded as such a medium.
But the purchasing power handed down from the immediate past
is modified by today's demand for and supply of money. Human
action is always pr&iding for the future, be it sometimes only the
future of the impending hour. He who buys, buys for future consumption and production. As far as he believes that the future will
differ from the present and the past, he modifies his vahation and
appraisement. This is no less true with regard to money than it is
with regard to all vendible goods. In this sense we may say that
today's exchange value of money is an anticipation of tomorrow's
exchange vaIue. The basis of all judgments concerning money is its
purchasing power as it was in the immediate past. But as far as cashinduced changes in purchasing power are expected, a second factor
enters the scene, the anticipation of these changes.
H e who believes that the prices of the goods in w h k h he takes an
interest will rise, buys more of them than he would have bought in
the absence of this Lelief; accordingly he restricts his cash holding.
H e who believes that prices will drop, restricts his purchases and thus
enlarges his cash holding. As long as such speculative anticipations
are limited to some commodities, they do not bring about a general
tende~lcytoward changes in cash holding. But it is different if people
believe that they are on the eve of big cash-induced changes in purchasing power. When they expect that the money prices of all goods
will rise or fall, they expand or restrict their purchases. These attitudes strengthen and accelerate the expected tendencies considerably.
This goes on until the point is reached beyond which no further
changes in the purchasing power of money are expected. Only then
does the inclination to buy or to sell stop and do people begin again
to increase or to decrease their cash holdings.
But if once public opinion is convinced that the increase in the

424
Human Action
quantity of money will continue and never come to an end, and that
consequently the prices of all commodities and services will not
cease to rise, everybody becomes eager to buy as much as possible
and to restrict his cash holding to a minimum size. For under these
circumstances the regular costs incurred by holding cash are increased by the losses caused by the progrcssivc fall in purchasing
power. The advantages of holding cash must be paid for by sacrifices
which are deemed unreasonably burdensome. 'JXs phenomenon was,
in the great European inflations of the 'twenties, called flight into real
goods (Flucht in die Sachwrte) or crack-up boom (Katastrophenhausse). The mathematical economists are at a loss to comprehend
the causal relation between the increase in the quantity of money and
what they call "velocity of circulation."
T h e characteristic nark of the phenomenon is that the increase in
the quantity of money causes a fall in the demand for money. The
tendency toward a fail in purchasing power as generated by the increased supply of money is intensified by the general propensity to
restrict cash holdings which it brings about. Eventually a point is
reached where the prices at which people would be prepared to part
with "real" goods discount to such an extent the expected progess
in the fall of purchasing poxvcr that nobody has a sufficient amount of
cash at hand to pay them. The monetary system breaks down; all
transactions in the money concerned cease; a panic makes its purchasing power vanish altogether. People return either to barter or
to the use of another kind of money.
T h e course of a progressing inflation is this: At the beginning the
inflow of additional money makes the prices of some commodities
and services rise; other prices rise latcr. The price rise affects the
various commodities and services, as has been shown, at different
dates and to a different extent.
This first stage of the inflationary process may last for many years.
'LVhiIe it lasts, the prices of many goods and services are not yet adjusted to the altered money relation. There are still people in the
country who have not yet become aw-are of the fact that they are
confronted with a price revohtion which will finaILy result in a
considerable rise of all prices, although the extent of this rise will not
be the same in the various commodities and services. These people
still belicve that prices one day will drop. Waiting for this day, they
restrict their purchases and concomitantly increase their cash holdings. As long as such ideas are still held by pubIic opinion, it is not
yet too late for the government to abandon its inflationary policy.
But then finally the masses wake up. They become suddenly aware

Indirect Exchange

425

of the fact that inflation is a deliberate policy and will go on endlessly. A breakdown occurs. Thc crack-up boom appears. Everybody is anxious to swap his money against "real" goods, no matter
whether he needs them or not, no matter how much money he has to
pay for them. Within a very short time, within a few weeks or even
days, the things which were used as money are no longer used as ~nedia
of exchange. They become scrap paper. Sobody wants to give away
anything against them.
It was this that happened with the Continental currency in America
in 1781, with the French mandats teuitoriaux in I 796, and with the
German Mark in I 92 3. It will happen again whenever the same conditions appear. If a thing has to be used as a medium of exchange, public
opinion must not believe that thc quantity of this thing will increase
beyond all bounds. Inflation is a policy that cannot last forever.

9. T h e Specific Value of Money
As far as a good used as money is valued and appraised on account
of the services it renders for nonmonetary purposes, no problems are
raised which would require special treatment. The task of the theory
of money consists merely in dealing with that component in the
valuation of money which is conditioned by its function as a medium
of exchange.
In the course of history various commodities have been employed
as media of exchange. A long evolution eliminated the greater part
of these commodities from the monetary function. Only two, the
precious metals gold and silver, remained. In the second part of the
nineteenth century more and more governments deliberately turned
toward the demonetization of silver.
In a11 these cases what is employed as money is a commodity which
is used also for nonmonetary purposes. Cnder the gold standard gold
is money and money is gold. It is immaterial whether or not the laws
assign legal tender jualjty only to gold coins minted by the government. What counts is t h t these coins really contain a fixed weight
of gold and every quantit). of bullion can freely be transformed into
coins. Under the gold sta~hardthe dollar and the pound sterling were
merely names for a definite weight of gold, within very narrow margins precisely determined by the laws. W e may call such a sort of
money commodity money.
A second sort of money is credit money. Credit money evolved
out of the use of money-substitutes. It was cuscomary to use claims,
payable on demand and absolutely secure, as substitutes for the sum

426

Hurnan Action

of money to which they gave a claim. (We shall deal with the features
and problems of money-substitutes in the next section.) The market
did not stop using such claims when one day their prompt redemption was suspendcd and thereby doubts about their safety and the
solvency of the obligee were raised. As long as these claims had been
daily maturing claims against a debtor of undisputed solvency and
could be collected without notice and free of expense, their exihange
value was equal to their face value; it was this perfect equivalcnce
which assigned to them the character of moncy-substitutes. Now,
as redemption was suspended, the maturity date postponed to an
undetermined day, and consequently doubts about the solvency of
the debtor or at least about his willingness to pay cmerged, they lost
a part of the value previously ascribed to them. They were now
merely claims, which did not bear interest, against a questionable
debtor and falling due on an undefined day. But as they were used as
media of exchange, their exchange value did not drop to the level
to which it would have dropped if they were merely claims.
One can fairly assume that such credit money could remain in use
as a medium of exchange even if it were to lose its character as a
claim against a bank or a treasury, and thus would become fiat money.
Fiat money is a moncy consisting of mere tokens which can neither
be employed for any industrial purposes nor convey a claim against
anybody.
It is not a task of catallactics but of economic history to investigate
whether there appeared in the past specimens of fiat money or whether
all the sorts of money which were not commodity money were credit
money. The only thing that catallactics has to establish is that the
possibility of the existence of fiat money must be admitted.
The important thing to be remembered is that with every sort
of money, demonetization-i.e., the abandonment of its use as a
medium of exchange-must result in a serious fall of its exchange
value. What this practically means has become manifest when in the
last eighty years the use of silver as commodity money has been progressively restricted.
There are specimens of credit money and fiat money which are
embodied in metallic coins. Such money is printed, as it were, on
silver, nickel, or copper. If such a piece of fiat moncy is demonetized,
it still retains exchange value as a piece of metal. But this is only a
very small indemnification of the owner. It has no practical importance.
T h e keeping of cash hoIding requires sacrifices. T o the extent that
a man keeps money in his pockets or in his balance with a bank, he

Indirect Exchange

427

forsakes the instantaneous acquisition of goods he could consume or
employ for production. In the market economy these sacrifices can
be precisely determined by calculation. They are equal to the amount
of originary interest he would have earned by investing the sum. The
fact that a man takes this falling off into account is proof that he
prefers the advantages of cash holding to the loss in interest yield.
It is possible to specify the advantages which people expect-from
keeping a definite amount of cash. But it is a delusion to assume that
an analysis of these motives could provide us with a theory of the
determination of purchasing power which could do without the
notions of cash holding and demand for and supply of money.12 The
advantages and disadvantages derived from cash holding are not
objective factors which could directly influence the size of cash
holdings. They are put on the scales by each individual and weighed
against one another. T h e result is a subjective judgment of value,
colored by the individual's personality. Different people and the
same people at different times value the same objective facts in a different way. Just as knowledge of a man's wealth and his physical condition does not tell us how much he would be prepared to spend for
food of a certain nutritive power, so knowledge about data concerning a man's material situation does not enable us to make definite
assertions with regard to the size of his cash holding.
10.

T h e Import of the Money Relation

The money relation, i.e., the relation between demand for and
supply of money, uniquely determines the price structure as far
as the reciprocal exchange ratio between money and the vendible
commodities and services is involved.
If the money relation remains unchanged, neither an inflationary
(expansionist) nor a deflationary (contractionist) pressure on trade,
business, production, consumption, and employment can emerge. The
assertions to the contrary reflect the grievances of people reluctant to
adjust their activities to the demands of their fellow men as manifested on the market. However, it is not an account of an alleged
scarcity of money that prices of agricultural products are too low to
secure t o the submarginal farmers proceeds of the amount they would
like to earn. The cause of these farmers' distress is that other'farmers
are producing at lower costs. What is wrong with British manufacturing is not that the "level" of prices is too low, but the fact that
12.

Such an attempt was made by Greidanus, The Value of Money (London,

' 9 3 2 ) , pp. '97 ff.

428
Human Action
they did not succeed in raising the productivity of the capital invested and the men employed to a height that would provide all the
goods the British want to consume.
An increase in the quantity of goods produced, other things being
unchanged, must bring about an improvement in people's conditions. Its consequence is a fall in the money prices of the goods the
production of which has been increased. But such a fall in money
prices does not in the lcast impair the benefits derived from the additional wealth produced. One may consider as unfair the increase in
the share of the additional wealth which goes to the creditors, although such criticisms are questionable as far as the rise in purchasing
power has been correctly anticipated and adequately taken into
account by a negative price premium.':' But one must not say that a
fall in prices caused by an increase in the production of the goods
concerned is the proof of some disequilibrium which cannot be
eliminated otherwise than b y increasing the quantity of money. Of
course, as a rule every increase in production of some or of all commodities requires a new allocation of factors of production to the
various branches of business. If the quantity of money remains unchanged, the necessity of such a reallocation becomes visible in the
price structure. Some lines of production become more profitable,
while in others profits drop or losscs appear. Thus the operation of
the market tends to eliminate these much discussed disequilibria. I t
is possible by means of an increase in the quantity of money to delay
or to interrupt this process of adjustment. It is impossible either to
make it superfluous or less painful for those concerned.
If the government-made cash-induced changes in the purchasing
power of money resulted only in shifts of wealth from some people
to other people. it would riot be permissible to condemn them from
the point of view of catallactics' scientific neutrality. I t is obviously
fraudulent to justify them under the pretext of the commonweal or
public welfare. But one could still consider them as political measures
suitable to promote the interests of some groups of people at the expense of others without further detriment. However, there are still
other things involved.
It is not necessary to point out the consequences to which a continued deflationary policy must lead. Nobody advocates such a
policy. The favor of the masses and of the wkters and politicians
eager for applause goes to infiation. With regard to these endeavors
we must emphasize three points. First: Inflationary or expansionist
1 3 - About the relations of the market rate of interest and changes in purchasing power, cf. below, Chapter XX.

Indirect Exchange

42 9

policy must result in overconsumption on the one hand and in malinvestment on the other. It thus squanders capital and impairs the
future state of want-satisfaction.14Second: The inflationary process
does not remove the necessity of adjusting production and reallocating resources. It merely- postpones it and thereby makes it
more troublesome. Third: Inflation cannot be employed as a permanent policy because it must, when continued, finally result in a
breakdown of the monetary system.
A retailer or innkeeper can easily fall prey to the illusion that a11
that is needed to make him and his colleagues more prosperous is more
spending on the part of the public. In his eyes the main thing is to
impel people to spend more. But it is amazing that this belief could be
presented to the world as a new social philosophy. Lord Keynes and
his disciples make the lack of the propensity to consume responsible
for what: they deem unsatisfactory in economic conditions. What is
needed, in their eyes, to make men more prosperous is not an increase
in production, but an increase in spending. In order to make it possible
for people to spend more, an "expansionist" policy is recommended.
This doctrine is as old as it is bad. Its analysis and refutation will be
undertaken in the chapter dealing with the trade cycle.15
I I.

The Money-Substitutes

Claims to a definite amount of money, payable and redeemable on
demand, against a debtor about whose solvency and willingness to
pay there does not prevail the slightest doubt, render to the individuaI
all the services money can render, provided that all parties with whom
he could possibly transact business are perfectly familiar with these
essential qualities of the claims concerned: daily maturity and undoubted solvency and willingness to pay on the part of the debtor.
W e may call such cIaims money-substitutes, as they can fully replace money in an individual's or a firm's cash holding. The technical
and legal features of the money-substitutes do not concern catallactics.
A money-substitute can be embodied eirher in a banknote or in a demand deposit with a bank subject to check ("checkbook money" or
deposit currency), provided the bank is prepared to exchange the
note or the deposit daily free of charge against money proper. Token
coins are also money-substitutes, provided the owner is in a position
to exchange them at need against money free of expense and without
delay. T o achieve this it is not required that the government be
14. Cf. below, pp. 561-562.
15. Cf. below, pp. 545-562.

430

Human Action

bound by law to redeem them. What counts is the fact that these
tokens can be really convcrted free of expense and without delay.
If the total amount of token coins issued is kept within reasonable
limits, no special provisions on the part of the government are necessary to keep their exchange value at par with their facc value. The
demand of the public for small change gives everybody the opportunity to exchange them easily against pieces of money. The main thing
is that every owner of a moncy-substitute is perfectly certain that it
can, at every instant and free of expense, be exchanged against money.
If the debtor-the government or a bank-keeps against the whole
amount of money-substitutes a reserve of money proper, we call the
moncy-substitute a money-certificate. The individual money-certificate is-not necessarily in a lcgal sense, but always in the catallactic
sense-a representative of a corresponding amount of money kept
in the reserve. The issuing of money-certificates does not increase the
quantity of things suitable to satisfy the demand for money for cash
holding. Changes in the quantity of money-certificates therefore do
not alter the supply of money and the money relation. Thcy do not
play any role in the determination of the purchasing power of money.
If the money reserve kcpt by the debtor against the money-substitutes issued is less than the total amount of such substitutes, we call
that amount of substitutes which exceeds the rescrve fiduciary media.
As a rule it is not possible to ascertain whether a concrete specimen
of money-substitutes is a money-certificate or a fiduciary medium. A
part of the total amount of money-substitutes issued is usually covcred
by a money reserve held. Thus a part of the total amount of moneysubstimtcs issued is money-certificates, the rest fiduciary media. But
this fact can only be recognized by those familiar with the bank's
balance sheets. The individual banknote, deposit, or token coin does
not indicate its catallactic character.
The issue of money-certificates does not increase the funds which
the bank can crnploi in the conduct of its lending business. A bank
which does not issue fiduciary media can only grant commodity
credit, ie., it can only lend its own funds and the amount of money
which its customers have entrustcd to it. The issue of fiduciary media
enlarges the bank's funds available for lending beyond these limits.
It can now not only grant commodity credit, but also circulation
credit, i.e., credit granted out of the issue of fiduciary media.
While the quantity of money-certificates is indifferent, the quantity
of fiduciary media is not. The fiduciary media affect the market
phenomena in the same way as money does. Changes in their quantity

Indirect Exchange

43 1

influence the determination of money's purchasing power and of
prices and-temporarily--also
of the rate of interest.
Earlier economists applied a different terminology. Many were prepared to call the money-substitutes simply money, as they are fit
to render the services money renders. However, this terminology
is not expedient. The first purpose of a scientific terminoIogy is to
facilitate the analysis of the problerns involved. The task of the catallactic theory of money-as differentiated from the legal theory and
from the technical disciplines of bank management and accountancy
-is the study of the problems of the determination of prices and interest rates. This task requires a sharp distinction between moneycertificates and fiduciary media.
The term credit expansion has often been ~nisinterpreted.It is
important to realize that con~moditycredit cannot be expanded. The
only vehicle of credit expansion is circulation credit. But the granting of circulation credit does not always mean credit expansion. If
the amount of fiduciary media previously issued has consummated
all its effects upon the market, if prices, wage rates, and interest rates
have been adjusted to the total supply of money proper plus fiduciary
media (supply of money in the broader sense), granting of circulation
credit without a further increase in the quantity of fiduciary media
is n o longer credit expansion. Credit expansion is present only if credit
is granted by the issue of an additional amount of fiduciary media,
not if banks lend anew fiduciary media paid back to them by the
old debtors.
12.

T h e Limitation on the Issuance of Fiduciary Media

People deal with money-substitutes as if they were money because
at it will bc pssibie to exchange them at
they are fully confident h
any time without delay and without cost against money. W e may
call those who share in this confidence and are therefore ready to
deal with money-substitutes as if they were money, the clients of the
iss~~ing
banker, bank, or authority. I t does not matter whether or not
this issuing establishment is operated according to the patterns of
conduct customary in the banking business. Token coins issued by
a country's treasury are money-substitutes too, although the treasury
as a rule does not enter the amount issued into its accounts as a
liability and does not consider this amount a part of the national
debt. It is no Iess immaterial whether or not the owner of a moneysubstitute has an actionable claim to redemption. What counts is

432
Human Action
whether the money-substitute can reaIly be exchanged against money
without delay and cost.16
Issuing money-certificates is an expensive venture. The banknotes
must be printed, the token coins minted; a compIicated accounting
system for the deposits must be organized; the reserves must be kept
in safety; then there is the risk of being cheated by counterfeit banknotes and checks. Against all these expenses stands only the slight
chance that some of thc banknotes issued may be destroyed and the
still slighter chance that some depositors may forget their deposits.
Issuing money-certificates is a ruinous business if not connected with
issuing fiduciary media. In the early history of banking there were
banlis whose only operation consisted in issuing money-certificates.
But these banlis were indemnified by their clients for the costs incurred. At any rate, catallactics is not iritcrested in the purely
technical problems of banks not issuing 5ducjary mcdia. The only
interest that catallactics takes in money-certificates is the connection
between issuing them and the issuing i f fiduciary media.
W7hile the quantity of nloncy-certificates is catallactically unimportant, an increase or decrease in the quantity of fiduciary media
affects the determination of money's purchasing power in the same
way as do changes in the quantity of money. Nence the question of
whether there are or are not limits to the increase in the quantity of
fiduciary media has fundamental importance.
If the clientele of the bank includes all rnembers of the market
economy, the limit to the issue of fiduciary media is the same as that
drawn to the increase in the quantity of money. A bank which is,
in an isolated country or in the whole world, the only institution
issuing fiduciary mcdia and the clientele of which comprises all individuals and firms, is bound to comply in its conduct of affairs with
two rules:
First: It must avoid any action which could tnake the clients-i.e.,
the public-suspicious. As soon as the clients begin to lose confidence,
:hey will ask for the rcdemption of the banknotes and withdraw their
16. I t is furthermore immaterial whether or not the laws assign to the rnoneysubstitutes legal tender quality. If these things are really dealt with by people as
money-substitutes and are therefore money-substitutes and equal in purchasing
power t o the respective amount of money, the only effect of the legal tender
quality is to prevent malicious people from resorting to chicanery for the mere
sake of annoying their fellow men. If, however, the things concerned are not
money-substitutes and are traded at a discount below their face value, the assignment of legal tender quality is tantamount to an authoritarian price ceiling, the
fixing of a maximum price for gold and foreign exchange and of a minimum
price for the things which are no longer money-substitutes but either credit
money or fiat money. Then the effects appear which Gresham's Law describes.

Indirect Exchange

43 3

deposits. H o w far the bank can go on increasing its issues of fiduciary
media without arousing distrust, depends on psychological conditions.
Second: It must not increase the amount of fiduciary ~nediaat
such a rate and with such speed that the clients get the conviction
that the rise in prices will continue endlessly at an accelerated pace.
For if the public believes that this is the case, they will reduce their
cash holdings, flee into "real" values, and bring about the crack-up
boom. It is impossible to imagine the approach of this catastrophe
without assuming that its fifst manifestation consists in the evanescence
of confidence. T h e public will certainly prefer exchanging the
fiduciary media against money t o fleeing into real values, i.e., to the
indiscriminate buying of various commodities. Then the bank must
go bankrupt. If the government interferes by freeing the bank from
the obligation of redeeming its banknotes and of paying back the
deposits in compliance with the terms of the contract, the fiduciary
~ncdiabecome either credit money or fiat money. T h e suspension of
specie paymenrs entirely changes the state of affairs. There is no longer
any q~~estion
of fiduciary media, of money-certificates, and of moneysubstitutes. T h e government enters the scene with its governmentmade legal tender laws. T h e bank loses its independent existence; it
t~ccornesa tool of government policies, a subordinate office of the
treasury.
The catallactically most important problems of the issuance of
fiduciary media on the part of a singlc bank, or of banks acting in
concert, the clientele of which comprehends all individuals, are not
those of the limitations drawn to the amount of their issuance. W e will
deal with them in Chapter XX, devoted to the relations between the
quantity of money and the rate of interest.
At this point of our investigations we have to scrutinize the problem of the coexistence of a multiplicity of independent banks. Independence means that every bank in issuing fiduciary media follows
its own coursc and does I& act in concert with oiher banks. Coexistence means that every bank has a clientele which does not include all members of the market system. For the sake of simplicity
w e will assume that no individual or firm is a client of more than one
bank. It would not affect the result of our demonstration if we were
t o assume that there are also people who are clients of more than one
bank and people who are not clients of any bank.
7-he question to be raised is not whether or not there are limits
to the issuance of fiduciary media on the part of such independently
coexisting banks. As there are even limits to the issuance of fiduciary
media on the part of a unique bank the clientele of which comprises

434
Human Action
all people, it is obvious that there arc such limits for a multiplicity
of indcpendently coexisting banks too. What we want to show is that
for such a multiplicity of independently coexisting banks the limits
are narrower than those drawn for a single bank with an unlimited
clientele.
We assume that within a market system several independent banks
have been established in the past. While previously only money was
in use, these banks have introduced the use of money-substitutes a
part of which are fiduciary media. Each bank has a clientele and has
issucd a certain quantity of fiduciary media which arc kept as moncysubstitutes in the cash holdings of various clients. T h e total quantity of
the fiduciary media as issued by the banks and absorbed by the cash
holdings of their clients has altercd the structure of prices and the
monetary unit's purchasing power. But these effects have already been
consumn~atedand at present thc ~narltetis no longer stirred bv any
movements gcncrated from this past credit expansion.
But now, we assume further, one bank alone cmbarlis upon an additional issue of fiduciary media whiIc the other banks do not follow
suit. T h e clients of the cxpanding bank-whether
its old clients
or new ones acquired on account of the expansion-receive additional
credits, they expand their business activities, they appear on the
market with an additional demand for goods and services, they bid
up priccs. Those people who are not clients of the expandingvbank
are not in a position to afford thcse higher priccs; they arc forced to
rcstrict their purchases. Thus there prevails on the market a shifting
of goods from the nonclients to the clients of the expanding bank. T h e
clients buy more from the nonclients than they sell to thcm; they havc
more to pay to the nonclients than th& receive from them. But
money-substitutes issued b y the expand& bank arc not suitablc for
paymcnts to nonclients, as these people do not assign to them the
ch'aracter of moncy-substitutes. In order to settle the payments due
to nonclients, the clients must first exchange the money-substitutes
issued by their own-viz., the expanding bank-against moncy. T h c
cxpanding bank must redeem its banknotes and pay out its deposits.
Its reserve-we suppose that only a part of the money-substitutcs it
had issued had the character of fiduciary media-dwindles. T h e instant approaches in which the bank will-after the exhaustion of its
tnoncy reservc-no longer be in a position to redecm the moneysubstitutes stilI current. In ordcr to avoid insolvency it must as soon
as possible return to a policy of strengthening its moncy rescrve. It
must abandon its expansionist methods.
This reaction of the market to a credit expansion on the part of a

Indirect Exchange

43 5

bank with a limited clientele has been brilliantly described by the
Currency School. The special case dealt with by the Currency School
referred to the coincidence of credit expansion on the part of one
country's privileged central bank or of all banks of one country and
of a nonexpansionist policy on the part of the banks of other countries.
Our demonstration covers the more general case of the coexistence of
a multiplicity of banks with different clientele as well as the most
general case of the existence of one bank with a limited clientele in a
system in which the rest of the people do not patronize any bank
and do not consider any claims as money-substitutes. It does not
matter, of course, whether one assumes that the clients of a bank live
neatly separated from those of the other banks in a definite district
or country or whether they live together with those of the other
banks. These are merely differences in the data not affecting the
catallactic problems involved.
A bank can never issue more money-substitutes than its clients
can keep in their cash holdings, The individual client can never keep
a larger portion of his total cash holding in money-substitutes than
that corresponding to the proportion of his turnover with other
clients of his bank to his total turnover. For considerations of convenience he will, as a rule, remain far below this maximum proportion. Thus a limit is drawn to the issue of fiduciary media. W e may
admit that everybody is ready to accept in his current transactions
indiscriminately banknotes issued by any bank and checks drawn
upon any bank. But he deposits without delay with his own bank not
only the checks but also the banknotes of banks of which he is not
himself a client. In the further course his bank settles its accounts with
the bank engaged. Thus the process described above comes into
motion.
A lot of nonsense has been written about a perverse predilection
of the public for banknotes issued by dubious banks. The truth is that,
cxcept for small groups of businessmen who were able to distinguish
bemeen good and bad banks, banknotes were always looked upon
with distrust. I t was the special charters which the governments
granted to privileged banks that slowly made these suspicions disappear. The often advanced argument that small banknotes come into
the hands of poor and ignorant people who cannot distinguish between good and bad notes cannot be taken seriously. The poorer
the recipient of a banknote is and the less familiar he is with bank
affairs, the more quickly will he spend the note and the more quickly
will it return, by w a i of retail and wholesale trade, to the issuing
bank or to people conversant with banking conditions.

436
Huma~Action
I t is very easy for a bank to increase the number of people who are
ready to accept loans granted by credit expansion and paid out in
an amount of money-substitutes. But it is very difficult for any bank
to enlarge its clientele, that is, the number of people who are ready to
consider these claims as money-substitutes and to keep them as such
in their cash-holdings. T o enlarge this clientele is a troublesome and
slow process, as is the acquisition of any kind of good will. On the
other hand, a bank can lose its clientele very quickly. If it wants to
preserve it, it must never permit any doubt about its ability and
readiness to discharge all its liabilities in due compliance with the
terms of the contract. A reserve must be licpt large enough to redeem
all banknotes which a holder may submit for redemption. Therefore no bank can content itself with issuing fiduciary media only; it
must keep a reserve against the total amount of money-substi&es
issued and thus combine issuing fiduciary media and rnoney-certificates.
It was a serious blunder to believe that the reserve's task is to provide the means for the redemption of those banknotes the holders of
which have lost confidence in the bank. The confidence which a bank
and the money-substitutes it has issued enjoy is indivisible. It is either
present with all its clients or it vanishes entirely. If some of the clients
lose confidence, the rest of them lose it too. N o bank issuing fiduciary
media and granting circulation credit can fulfill the oblig-ations which
it has taken over in issuing money-substitutes if all clients are losing
confidence and want to have their banknotes redeemed and their
deposits paid back. This is an essential feature or weakness of the
business of issuing fiduciary media and granting circulation credit.
K O system of reserve policy and no reserve requirements as enforced
by the laws can remedy it. All that a reserve can do is to make it possible for the bank to withdraw from the market an excessive amount
of fiduciary media issued. If the bank has issued more banknotes than
its clients can use in doing business with other clients, it must redeem
such an excess.
T h e laws which compelled the banks to keep a reserve in a definite
ratio of the total amount of deposits and of banknotes issued were
effective in so far as they restricted the increase in the amount of
fiduciary media and of circulation credit. They were futile as far as
they aimed at safeguarding, in the event of a loss of confidence, the
prompt redemption of the banlmotes and the prompt payment of
deposits.
T h e Banking School failed entirely in dealing with these problems.
It was confused by a spurious idea according to which the require-

Indirect Exchange

43 7

ments of business rigidly limit the maximum amount of convertible
banknotes that a bank can issue. They did not see that the demand
of the public for credit is a magnitude dependent on the banks'
readiness to lend, and that banks which do not bother about their own
solvency are in a position to expand circulation credit by lowering
the rate of interest below the market rate. It is not true that the maximum amount which a bank can lend if it limits its lending t o discounting short-term bills of exchange resulting from the sale and purchase
of raw materials and half-manufactured goods, is a quantity uniquely
determined by the state of business and independent of the bank's
policies. This quantity expands or shrinks with the lowering or raising of the rate of discount. Lowering the rate of interest is tantamount
t o increasing the quantity of what is mistakenly considered as the
fair and normal requirements of business.
T h e Currency School gave a quite correct explanation of the recurring crises as they upset English business conditions in the 'thirties
and 'forties of the nineteenth century. There was credit expansion on
the part of the Bank of England and the other British banks and
bankers, while there was no credit expansion, or at least not to the
same degree, in the countries with which Great Britain traded. T h e
external drain occurred as the necessary consequence of this state
of affairs. Everything that the IZanking School advanced in order to
refute this theory was vain. Unfortunately, the Currency School
erred in t w o respects. I t never realized that the remedy it suggested,
namely strict legal limitation of the amount of banknotes issued beyond the specie reserve, was not the only one. It never gave a thought
to the idea of free banking. T h e second fault of the Currency School
was that it failed to recognize that deposits subject to check are
money-substitutes and, as far as their amount exceeds the reserve kept,
fiduciary media, and consequentl\; no less a vehicle of credit expansion than are banknotes. It was thk only merit of the Banking School
that it recognized that what is called deposit currency is a moneysubstitute no less than banknotes. But except for this point, all the
doctrines of the Banking School were spurious. I t was guided b y
contradictory ideas concerning money's neutrality; it tried to refute
the quantity theory of money b y referring to a deus ex macbinn, the
much talked about hoards, and it misconstrued entirely the problems
of the rate of interest.
I t must be emphasized that the problem of legal restrictions upon
the issue of fiduciary media could emerge only because governments
had granted special privileges t o one or seveial banks and had thus
prevented the free evolution of banking. If the governments had

438
Human Action
never interfered for the benefit of speciaI banks, if they had never
released some banks from the obligation, incumbent upon all individuals and firms in the market economy, to settle their liabilities in
full compliance with the terms of the contract, no bank problem
would have come into being. The limits which are drawn to credit
expansion would have worked effectively. Considerations of its own
solvency would have forced every bank to cautious restraint in issuing
fiduciary media. Those banks which would not have observed
these indispensable rules would have gone bankrupt, and the public,
warned through damage, would have become doubly suspicious and
reserved.
The attitudes of the European governments and their satellites with
regard to banking were from thc beginning insincere and mendacious.
The pretended solicitude for the nation's welfare, for the public in
general, and for the poor ignorant masses in particular was a mere
blind. The governments wanted inflation and credit expansion, they
wanted booms and easy money. Those Americans who twice succeeded in doing away with a central bank were aware of the dangers
of such institutions; it was only too bad that they failed to see that
the evils they fought \\.ere present in every kind of government intcrferencc with banking. Today even the most bigoted Ctatists cannot
deny that a11 the alleged evils of free banking count little when
compared with the disastrous effects of the tremendous inflations
which the privileged and government-controlled banks have brought
about.
It is a fable that governments interfered with banking in order to
restrict the issue of fiduciary media and to prevent credit expansion.
The idea that guided governments was, on the contrary, the lust for
inflation and credit expansion. They privileged banks because they
wanted to widen the limits drawn to credit expansion by conditions
prevailing on the unhampered market or because they were eager to
open to the treasury a source of revenue. For the most part both of
these considerations motivated the authorities. They were convinced
that the fiduciary media are an efficient means of lowering the rate
of interest, and asked the banks to expand credit for the bcnefit of
both business and the treasury. Only when the undesired effects of
credit expansion became visible, were laws enacted to restrict the
issue of banknotes-and sometimes also of deposits-not covered by
specie. The establishment of free banking was never seriously considered precisely because it would have been too efficient in restricting credit expansion. For rulers, writers, and the public were unanimous in the belief that business has a fair claim to a "normal" and

Indirect Exchange

439

'hecessary" amount of circulation credit and that this amount could
not be attained under free banking1'
Many governments never looked upon the issuance of fiduciary
media from a point of view other than that of fiscal concerns. In
their eves the foremost task of the banks was to lend money to the
treasury. The money-substitutes were pacemakers for governmentissued paper money. T h e convertibIe banknote was merely a first step
on the way to the nonredeemable banknote. With the progress of
statolatry and the policy of interventionism these ideas have become
general and are no longer questioned by anybody. No government
is willing today to give any thought to the program of free banlting
lxxause no government wants to renounce what it considers a handy
scurce of revenue. W h a t is called today financial war preparedness
is merely the ability to procure by means of privileged and government-controlled banks all the money a warring nation may need.
Radical inflationism, although not adrnitted explicitly, is an essentia1
feature of the economic ideology of our age.
nut even at the time liberalism enjoyed its highest prestige and
governments were more eager to preserve peace and welI-being than
to foment mar, death, destruction, and misery, people were biased
in dealing with the problems of banking. Outside of the Anglo-Saxon
countries public opinion was convinced that it is one of the main
tasks of good government to lower the rate of interest and that credit
expansion is the appropriate means for the attainment of this end.
Great Britain was free from these errors when in 1844it reformed
its bank laws. But the two shortcomings of the Currency School
vitiated this famous act. On one hand, the system of government interference with banking was preserved. On the other hand, limits
were placed only on the issuance of banknotes not covered by specie.
The fiduciary media were suppressed only in the shape of banknotes.
They could thrive as deposit currency.
111 carrying the idea implied in the Currency Theory to its full
logical conclusion, one could suggest that all banks be forced by law
to keep against the total amount of money-substitutes (banknotes
plus demand deposits) a ioo per ccnt money reserve. This is the core
of Professor Irving Fisher's ioo per ccnt plan. But Professor Fisher
combined his plan with his proposals concerning the adoption of an
index-number standard. It has been pointed out already why such a
17. T h e notion of "normaIn credit expansion is absurd. Issuance of additional
fiduciary media, no matter what its quantity may be: always sets in motion those
changes in the price structure the description of which is the task of the theory of
the trade cycle. Of course, if the additional amount issued is not large, neither are
the inevitable effects of the expansion.

440
Human Action
scheme is illusory and tantamount to open approval of the government's power to manipulate purchasing power according to the
appetites of powerful pressure groups. But even if the I O O per cent
reserve plan were to be adopted on the basis of the unadulterated
gold standard, it would not entireIy remove the drawbacks inherent
in every kind of government interference with banking. What is
needed to prevent any further credit expansion is to place the banking business under the general rules of commercia1 and civil laws
compelling every individual and firm to fulfill all obIigations in full
compliance with the terms of the contract. If banks are preserved as
privileged establishments subject to special legislative provisions, the
tool remains that governments can use for fiscal purposes. Then every
restriction imposed upon the issuance of fiduciary media depends
upon the government's and the padiament's good intentions. 'llley
may limit the issuance for periods which are called normal. The
restriction will be withdrawn whenever a government deems that
an emergency justifies resorting to extraordinary measures. If an
administration and the party backing it want to increase expenditure
without jeopardizing their popularity through the imposition of
higher taxes, they will always be ready to call their irnpasse an
emergency. Recourse to the printing press and to the obsequiousness
of bank managers, willing to oblige the authorities regulating thcir
conduct of affairs, is the foremost means of governments eager to
spend money for purposes for which the taxpayers are not ready to
pay higher taxes.
Free banking is the only method available for the prevention of
the dangers inherent in credit expansion. It would, it is truc, not
hinder a slow credit expansion, kept within very narrow limits, on
the part of cautious banks which provide the public with all information required about their financial status. But under free banking it
would have been impossible for credit expansion with all its inevitable
consequences to have developed into a regular-one is tempted to say
normai-feature of rhe economic system. Only free banking wouici
have rendered the market economy secure against crises and depressions.
Looking backward upon the history of the last hundred years, one
cannot help realizing that the blunders committed by liberalism in
handling the problems of banking were a deadly blow to the market
economy. There was no reason whatever to abandon the principle
of free enterprise in the field of banking. The majority of liberal
politicians simply surrendered to the popular hostility against moneylending and interest taking. They failed to realize'that the rate of

Indirect Exchange

441

interest is a market phenomenon which cannot be manipulated ad
libitum b y the authorities or by any other agency. T h e y adopted the
superstiti& that lowering the rate of interest is beneficial and that
credit expansion is the right means of attaining such cheap money.
Nothing harmed the cause of liberalism more than the almost regular
rcturn of feverish booms and of the dramatic breakdown of bull markets followed by lingering slumps. Public opinion has become convinced that such happenings are inevitable in the unhampered market economy. People did nor conceive that what they lamented was
the necessary outcome of policies directed toward a lowering of the
rate of interest b y means of credit expansion. T h e y stubbornly kept
t o these policies and tried in vain t o fight their undesired consequences
b y more and more government interference.

Observdons on the Di~cwssionsConcerning Free Banking
The Banking School taught that an overissuance of banknotes is impossible if the bank limits its business to the granting of short-term loans.
When the loan is paid back at maturity, the banknotes rcturn to the bank
and thus disappear from the market. However, this happens only if the
bank restricts the amount of credits granted. (Rut even then it would not
undo the effects of its previous credit expansion. It would merely add to it
the effects of a later credit contraction.) The regular course of affairs is
that the bank rcplaces the bills expired and paid back by discounting new
bills of exchange. Then to the amount of banknotes withdrawn from the
market by the repayment of the earlier loan there corresponds an amount
of newly issued banknotes.
The concatenation which sets a limit to credit expansion under a system
of free banking works in a different way. It has no reference whatever to
the process which this so-called Principle of Fullarton has in mind. It is
brought about by the fact that credit expansion in itself does not expand a
bank's clientele, viz., the number of people who assign to the demandclaims against this bank the character of money-substitutes. Since the overissuance of fiduciary media on the part of one bank, as has been shown
above, increases the amounr to be paid by the expanding bank%ciients to
other people, it increases concomitantly the demand for the redemption
of its moncy-substitutes. It thus forces the expanding bank back to a restraint.18
This fact was never questioned with regard to demand deposits subject
to check. It is obvious that an expanding bank would very soon find itself
in a difficult position in clearing with the other banks. However, people
sometimes maintained that things are different as far as banknotes are concerned.
18. Vera C. Smith has not paid due attention to this primordial fact in her
meritorious book The Rationale of Central Banking (Londnn, 1936), pp. 157ff.

442
Hu7nan Action
In deaIing with the problems of money-substitutes, catallactics maintains that the claims in question are dealt with by a number of people like
money, that they are, like money, given away and received in transactions
and kept in cash holdings. Everything that catallactics asserts with regard
to money-substitutes presupposes this state of affairs. But it would be preposterous to beIieve that every banknote issued by any bank really becomes
a money-substitute. What makes a banknote a money-substitute is the
special kind of good will of the issuing bank. The slightest doubt concerning the bank's ability or willingness to redeem every banknote without any
delay at any time and with no expense to the bearer impairs this special
good will and removes the banknotes' character as a money-substitute. W e
may assume that everybody not only is prepared to get such questionable
banknotes as a loan but also prefers to receive them as payment instead of
waiting longer. But if any doubts exist concerning their prime character,
people will hurry to get rid of them as soon as possible. They will keep in
their cash holdings money and such money-substitutes as they consider
perfectly safe and will dispose of the suspect banknotes. These banknotes
will be traded at a discount, and this fact wilI carry thcm back to the issuing
bank which alone is bound to redeem thcm at their full face value.
The issue can still better be clarified by reviewing banking conditions in
continental Europe. Here the commercial banks were free from any limitation concerning the amount of deposits subject to check. They would have
been in a position to grant circulation credit and thus expand credit by
adopting the methods applied by the banks of the Anglo-Saxon countries.
However, the public was not ready to treat such bank deposits as moneysubstitutes. As a rule a man who received a check cashed it immediately
and thereby withdrew the amount from the bank. It was impossible for a
commercial bank to lend, except for negligibIe sums, by crediting the
debtor's account. As soon as the debtor wrote out a check, a withdrawal of
the amount concerned from the bank resulted. OnIy a small group of big
business treated deposits with the country's Central Bank of Issue (not
those with the commercial banks) as money-substitutes. Although the
Central Banks in most of these countries were not submitted to any legal
restrictions with regard to their deposit business, they were prevented from
using it as a vehicle of large-scale credit expansion because the clientele for
deposit currency was too small. Banknotes were practicalIy the sole instrument of circulation credit and credit expansion. Similar conditions
prevailed and for the most part still prevail by and large in all countries
of the world which are outside the pale of Anglo-Saxon banking methods.
In the 'eighties of the nineteenth century the Austrian Government embarked upon a project of popularizing checkbook money by establishing a
checking account department with the Post Office Savings Service. It succeeded to some degree. Balances with this department of the Post Office
were treated as money-substitutes by a clientele which was broader than
that of the checking account department of the country's Central Bank of

Indirect Exchange

443

Issue. The system was later preserved by the new states which in 1918 succeeded the Habsburg Empire. It has also been adopted by many other
European nations, for instance Germany. It is important to realize that this
kind of deposit currency was a purely governmental venture and that the
circulation credit that the system granted was exclusively lent to the
governments. It is characteristic that the name of the Austrian Post Office
Savings Institution, and likewise of most its foreign replicas, was not Savings Bank, but Savings O f i c e (Amt). Apart from these demand deposits
with the government post system in most of the non-Anglo-Saxon comtries, banknotes-and, to a small extent, also deposits with the Governmentcontrolled Central Bank of Issue-are the only vehicles of circulation
credit. In speaking of credit expansion with regard to these countries, one
refers almost entirely to banknotes.
In the United States many employers pay salaries and even wages by
writing out checks. As far as the payees immediately cash the checks received and withdraw the whole amount from the bank, the method means
merely that the onerous burden of manipdating coins and banknotes is
shifted from the employer's cashier to the bank's cashier. It has no catallactic implications. If all citizens were to deal in this way with checks receivcd,
the deposits would not be money-substitutes and could not be used as instruments of circulation credit. It is solely the fact that a considerable part
of the public looks upon deposits as money-substitutes that makes them
what is popularly called checkbook money or dcposit currency.
I t is a mistake to associate with the notion of free banking the image of a
state of affairs under which everybody is free to issue banknotes and to
cheat the public ad libitum. People often refer to the dictum of an anonymous American quoted by Tooke: "Free trade in banking is free trade in
swindling." However, freedom in the issuance of banknotes would have
narrowed down the use of banknotes considerably if it had not entirely
suppressed it. It was this idea which Cernuschi advanced in thc hearings of
the French Banking Inquiry on October 24, 1865: "I believe that what is
called freedom of banking would result in a total suppression of banknotes
in France. I want to give everybody the right to issue banknotes so that
nobody should take any banknotes any longer."
People may uphold the opinion that banknotes are more handy than
coins and that considerations of convenience recommend their use. As far
as this is the case, the public would be prepared to pay a premium for the
avoidance of the inconveniences involved in carrying a heavy weight of
coins in their pockets. Thus in earlier days banknotes issued by banks of
unquestionable solvency stood at a slight premium as against rnetallic currency. Thus travelers' checks are rather popular although the bank issuing
them charges a commission for their issuance. But all this has no reference
whatever t o the problem in question. It does not provide a justification
for the policies urging the public to resort to the use of banknotes. Govern19. Cf. Cernuschi, Contre le billet de banque (Paris, 1866), p. 55.

444

Human Action

ments did not foster the use of banltnotes in order to avoid inconvenience
to ladies shopping. Their idea was to lower the rate of interest and to open
a source of cheap credit to their treasuries. In their eyes the increase in the
quantity of fiduciary media was a means of promoting welfare.
Banknotes are not indispensable. All the economic achievements of
capitalism would have been accomplished if they had never existed. Besides,
deposit currency can do all the things banknotes do. And government interference with the deposits of commercial banks cannot be justified by the
hypocritical pretext that poor ignorant wage earners and farmers must be
protected against wicked bankers.
But, some people may ask, what about a cartel of the commercial banks?
Could not the banks collude for the sake of a boundless expansion of their
issuance of fiduciary media? The objection is preposterous. As long as the
public is not, by government interference, deprived of the right of withdrawing its deposits, no bank can risk its own good will by collusion with
banks whose good will is not so high as its own. One must not forget that
every bank issuing fiduciary media is in a rather precarious position. Its
most valuable asset is its reputation. It must go bankrupt as soon as doubts
arise concerning its perfect trustworthiness and solvency. It would be
suicidal for a bank of good standing to link its name with that of other
banks with a poorer good will. Under free banking a cartel of the banks
would destroy the country's wholc banking system. It would not servc the
interests of any bank.
For the most part the banks of good repute are blamed for their conservatism and their reluctance to expand credit. In the eyes of people not
deserving of credit such restraint appears as a vice. But it is the first and
supreme rule for the conduct of banking operations under frce banking.
It is extremely difficult for our contemporaries to conceive of the conditions of free banking because they take government interference with
banking for granted and as necessary. However, one must remember that
this government interference was based on the erroneous assumption that
credit expansion is a proper means of lowering the rate of interest permanently and without harm to anybody but the callous capitalists. The
governments interfered precisely because they knew that frce banking
keeps credit expansion within narrow limits.
Economists may be ~ i g h tin asserting that the present state of banking
makes government interference with banking problems advisable. But this
present state of banking is not the outcome of the operation of the unhampered market economy. It is a product of the various governments' attempts to bring about the conditions required for large-scale credit expansion. If the governments had nevcr interfered, the use of banknotes and
of deposit currency would be limited to those strata of the population u 110
know very well how to distinguish between solvent and insolvent banks.
K O large-scale credit expansion wouId have been possible. The governments alone are responsible for the spread of the superstitious awe with
which the common man looks upon every bit of paper upon which the

Indirect Exchange

445

treasury or agencies which it controls have printed the magical words
legal tender.

Government interfercnce with the present state of banking affairs could
be justified if its aim were to liquidate the unsatisfactory conditions by pre-

venting or a t least seriously restricting any further credit expansion. In
fact, the chief objective of present-day government interference is to intensify further credit expansion. This policy is doomed to faiIure. Sooner
or later it must result in a catastrophe.

I 3.

T h e Size and Composition of Cash Holdings

T h e total amount of money and money-substitutes is kept by individuals and firms in their cash holdings. T h e share of each is determined b y marginal utility. Each is eager to keep a certain portion
of his total wealth in cash. H e gets rid of an excess of cash by increased purchases and remedies a deficiency of cash b y increased
sales. T h e popular terminology confusing the demand for money for
cash holding and the demand for wealth and vendible goods must not
delude an economist.
What is valid with regard to individuals and firms is no less true
with regard to cvery sum of the cash holdings of a number of individuals and firms. he point of view from which we treat a number of such individuals and firms as a totality and sum up their cash
holdings is immaterial. T h e cash holdings o i a city, a province, or a
country is the sum of the cash holdings of all its residents.
Let us assume that the market economy uses only one kind of money
and that money-substitutes are either unknown or used in the whole
arca by everybody without any difference. Thcre are, for example,
gold money and redeemable banknotes, issued by a world bank and
treated b y everybody as money-substitutes. O n these assumptions
measures hindering the exchange of commodities and services do not
affect the state of monetary affairs and the size of cash holdings.
Tarifis, embargoes, and migration barriers affect the tendencies toward an equalization of prices, wages, and interest rates. T h e y do not
react directly upon cash holdings.
If a government aims at increasing the amount of cash kept b y its
subjects, it must order them to deposit a certain amount with an office
and to leave it there untouched. T h e necessity of procuring this
amount would force everybody to sell more and ;o buy less; domestic
prices would drop; cxports would be increased and imports reduced;
a quantity of cash would be imported. But if the government were
simply to obstruct the importation of goods and the exportation of

446

Human Action

money, it would fail to attain its goal. If imports drop, other things
being equal, exports drop concomitantly.
T h e role money plays in international trade is not diffcrcnt from
that which it plays in domestic trade. Money is no less a medium of
exchange in foreign trade than it is in domestic trade. Both in domcstic
trade and in international trade purchases and sales result in a more
than passing change in the cash holdings of individuals and firms only
if people are purposely intent upon increasing or restricting the size
of their cash holdings. A surplus of moncy flows into a country only
when its rcsidents are more eager to increase their cash holdings than
are the foreigners. An outflow of money occurs only if the residents
arc more eager to reduce their cash holdings than are the foreigners.
A transfer of money from one country into another country which
is not compensated by a transfcr in the opposite direction is never the
unintended result of international trade transactions. It is always the
outcome of intended changes in the cash holdings of the residents.
Just as wheat is cxported only if a country's residents want to export
a surplus of wheat, so money is exportcd only if the rcsidcnts want to
export a sum of money which they consider as a surplus.
If a country turns to the employment of money-substitutes which
are not employed abroad, such a surpIus emerges. The appearance of
these money-substitutes is tantamount to an increase in the country's
supply of money in the broader sense, i.c., supply of money plus
fiduciary media; it brings about a surplus in the supply of moncy in
the broadcr sense. The residents are eager to get rid of their share
in the surplus by increasing their purchases either of domestic or of
foreign goods. In the first case cxports drop and in the second case
imports increase. In both cases the surplus of money goes abroad. As,
according to our assumption, money-substitutes cannot be exportcd,
only money proper flows out. The result is that within the domestic
supply of money in the broader sense (money fiduciary media)
the portion of money drops and the portion of fiduciary media increases. The domestic stock of money in the narrower sense is now
smaller than it was previously.
Now, we assume further, the domestic money-substitutes cease
to be money-substitutes. T h e bank which issued them no longer
redeems them in money. These former ~noney-substitutes are now
claims against a bank which does not fulfill its obligations, a bank
whose ability and wilIingncss to pay its debts is questionable. Nobody knows whcther and when they will ever be redeemed. But it
may be that these claims are used by the public as credit money. As
money-substitutes they had been considered as equivalents of the

+

lndirect Exchange

447

sum of money to which they gave a claim payable at any moment.
As credit money they are now traded at a discount.
At this point the government may interfere. It decrees that these
pieces of credit money are legal tender at their face value.'O Every
creditor is bound to accept them in payment at their face value. N o
trader is free to discriminate acrainst them. T h e decree tries to force
P
the public to treat things of different exchange value as if they had
the same exchange value. It interferes with the structure of prices
as determined by the market. I t fixes ~ninimumprices for the credit
money and maximum prices for the commodity money (gold) and
fore& exchange. T h e result is not what the government aimed at.
T h e difference in exchange value between credit money and gold
does not disappear. As it is forbidden to employ the coins according
to their market price, people no longer employ them in buying and
selling and in paying debts. They keep them or they export them.
T h e conmodity money disappears from the domestic market. Bad
money, says res sham's Law, drives good money out of the country. I t would be more correct to say that the money which the
government's decree has undervalued disappears from the market
and the money which the decree has overvalued remains.
T h e outflow of commodity money is thus not the effect of an unfavorable balance of payments, but the effect of a government interference with the price structure.

14. Balances of Payments
T h e confrontation of the money equivalent of all incomings and
outgoings of an individual or a group of individuals during any particular period of time is called the balance of payments. T h e credit
side and the debit side art always equal. T h e balance is always in
balance.
If we want to know an ,ndividual's position in the frame of the
tnarltet economy, we must look at his balance of payments. It tells us
everything about the role he plays in the system of the social division
of labor. I t shows what he gives t o his fellow men and what he receives
or takes from them. It shows whether he is a self-supporting decent
citizen or a thief or an almsman. It shows whether he consumes a11 his
proceeds o r whether he saves a part of them. There are many human
2 0 . Very often the legal tender quality had bccn granted to these banknotes
at a time when they still were money-wbstitutes and as such equal to money in
their exchange value. At that time the decree had no catallactic importance. Now
it becomes important because the market no longer considers them moneysubstitutes.

448

Human Action

things which are not reflected in the sheets of the ledger; there are
virtues and achievements, vices and crimes that do not Ieave any
traces in the accoints. But as far as a man is integrated into socia1 life
and activities, as far as he contributes to the joint effort of society and
his contributions are appreciated by his fellow men, and as far as
he consumes what is or could be sold and bought on the market, the
information conveyed is complete.
If we combine the balances of payments of a definite number of
individuals and Ieave out of account the items referring to transactions between the members of this group, we draw up the group's
balance of payment. This balance tells us how the members of the
group, considered as an integrated complex of people, are connected
with the rest of the market society. Thus we can draw up the balance
of payments of the members of the New York Bar, of the Belgian
farmers, of the residents of Paris, or of those of the Swiss Canton of
Bern. Statisticians are mostly interested in establishing the balance of
payments of the residents of the various countries which are organized
as independent nations.
While an individual's balance of payments convcys exhaustive information about his social position, a group's balance discloses much
less. I t says nothing about the mutual relations between the members
of the group. The greater the group is and the less homogeneous its
members are, the more defective is the information vouchsafed by
the balance of payments. The balance of payments of 1,atvia tells
more about the conditions of the Latvians than the United States
balance of payments about the conditions of the Americans. If one
wants to describe a country's social and economic condition, one
does not need to deal with every single inhabitant's personal balance
of payments. But one must not form other groups than such as are
composed of members who arc by and large homogeneous in their
social standing and their economic activities.
Reading balances of payments is thus very instructive. Howcver,
one must know how to interpret them, to guard against popular
f allacies.
It is customary to list separately the monetary and the nonmonetary
items of a country's balance of payments. One calls thc balance
favorable if there is a surplus of the imports of money and bullion
over the exports of money and bullion. One calls the balance unfavorable if the exports of money and bullion exceed the imports.
This terminology stems from inveterate Mercantilist errors unfortunately still surviving in spite of the devastating criticisms of the
economists. The imports and exports of money and buIlion are viewed

Indirect Exchange

449

as the unintentional outcome of the configuration of the nonmonetary items of the balance of payments. This opinion is utterly fallacious. An excess in the exports of money and bullion is not the
product of an unhappy concatenation of circumstances that befalls
a nation like an act of God. It is the result of the fact that the residents
of the country concerned are intent upon reducing the amount of
money held and upon buying goods instead. This is why the balance
of payments of the gold-producing countries is as a rule "unfavorable"; this is why the balance of payments of a country substituting
fiduciary media for a part of its money stock is "unfavorable" as
long as this process goes on.
No provident action on the part of a paternal authority is required
lest a country lose its whole money stock by an unfavorable balance
of payments. Things are in this regard not different between the
personal balances of payments of individuals and those of groups.
Neither are they different between the balances of payments of a
city or a district and those of a sovereign nation. No govcrnmcnt
interfcrence is needed to prevent the residents of New York from
spending all their money in dealings with the other forty-seven states
of the Union. As long as any American attaches any weight to the
keeping of cash, he will spontaneously take charge of the matter.
Thus he will contribute his share to the maintenance of an adequate
supply of money in his country. Bnt if no American were interested
in keeping, any cash holding, no Sovernment measure concerning
foreign trade and the settlement of jntcrnational payments could
prevent an outflow of America's total monetary stock. A rigidly enforced embargo upon the exportation of money and bullion would
be required.
15.

Interlocal Exchange Rates

Let us first assume that there is only one kind of money. Then
with regard to money's purchasing power at various places the same
is valid as with regard to commodity prices. The final price of cotton
in IAiverpoolcannot exceed thc final price in Houston, Texas, by
more than thc cost of transportation. As soon as the price in Liverpool rises to a higher point, merchants will ship cotton to Liverpool
and thus will bring about a tendency toward a return to the final
price. The price of an order for the payment of a definite amount of
guilders in Amsterdam cannot rise in New York above the amount
determined by the costs involved by reminting the coins, shipment,
insurance, and the interest during {he period required for all these
manipulations. As soon as the difference rises above this point-the

450

Human Action

gold export point-it becomes profitable to ship gold from New York
to Amsterdam. Such shipments force the guilder exchange rate in
New York down below the gold export point. A difference between
the configuration of interlocal exchange rates for commodities and
those for money is brought about by the fact that as a rule commodities move only in one direction, namcly, from the places of surplus
production to those of surplus consumption. Cotton is shipped from
Houston to Liverpool and not from Liverpool to Houston. Its price is
lower in Houston than in Liverpool by the amount of shipping costs.
But money is shipped now this way, now that.
T h e error of those who try to interpret the fluctuations of the
interlocal exchange rates and the interlocal shipments of money as
determined by the configuration of the nonmonetary items of the
balance of payments is that they assign to money an exceptional position. They do not see that with regard to interIoca1 exchange rates
there is no difference between money and commodities. If cotton
trade between Houston arid Liverpool is possible at all, the cotton
prices at these two places cannot differ by more than the total amount
of costs required for shipment. In the same way in which there is a
flow of cotton from the southern states of the United States to
Europe, gold flows from the gold-producing countries like South
Africa to Europe.
L:t us disregard the case of the gold-producing countries and let
us assun e that the individuals and firms trading with one another on
the basis of the gold standard do not have the intention of changing
the size of their cash holdings, From their purchases and sales, claims
are generat:d which necessitate interlocal payments. But according
to our assumption these interlocal payments are equal in amount. The
amount that thc residents of A have to pay to the rcsidents of B is
equal to the amount that the residents of B have to pay to the residents
of A. It is therefore possible to save the costs of shipping gold from
A to B and from B to A. Claims and debts can be settled by a sort of
interlocal clearing. It is merely a technical problem whether this
evening up is affected by an interlocal clearinghouse organization or
by the turnovers of a special market for foreign exchange. At any rate,
the price which a resident of A (or of B) has to pay for a payment
due in B (or in A ) is kept within the margins determined by the
shipment costs. It cannot rise above the par value by more than the
shipment costs (gold export point) and cannot fall below the shipment costs (gold import point).
It may happen that-all our other assun~ptionsremaining unaltered
-there is a temporal discrepancy between the payments due from

hdirect Exchange

451

A to U and those from B to A. Then an interlocal shipment of gold
can only be avoided by the interposition of a credit transaction, If
the importer who today has to pay from A to B can buy at the marltet of foreign exchange only such claims against residents of B as fall
dlle in ninety days, he can save the costs of shipping gold by borrowing the sum concerned in B for a period of ninety days. The dealers
in foreign exchange will resort to this makeshift if the costs of borrowing in B do not exceed the costs of borrowing in A by more than
double the costs of shipping gold. If the cost of shipping gold is 1/8 per
cent, they will be ready to pay for a three months' loan in B up to
I per cent (pro anno) more as interest than corresponds to the state
of the money-market intercst rate at which, in the absence of such
requirements for interlocal payments, credit transactions between
A and B would be effected.
It is permissible to express these facts by contending that the daily
state of the baIance of payments t)etween A and B determines the
point at which, within the margins drawn by the goId export point
and the gold import point, the foreign exchange rates are fixed. But
one must not forget to add that this happens only if the residents of
A and of B do not intend to change the size of their cash holdings.
Only because this is the case does it become possibIe to avoid the
transfer of gold altogether and to keep foreign exchange rates within
the limits drawn by the two gold points. If the residents of A want
to reduce their cash holdings and those of R want to increase theirs,
gold must be shipped from A to B and the rate for cable transfer B
reaches in A the gold export poinr. Then gold is sent from A to B
in the same way in which cotton is regularly sent from the United
States to Europe. The rate of cable transfer B reaches the gold export
point because the residents of A are selling gold to those of B, not because their balance of payments is unfavorable.
All this is valid with regard to any payments to be transacted between various places. It makes no difference whether the cities concerned belong to the same sovereign nation or to different sovereigl~
nations. However, government interference has considerably changed
the conditions. All governments have created institutions which make
it possible for the residents of their countries t o make interlocal
domestic payments at par. The costs involved in shipment of currency from one place to another are borne either by the treasury or
by ;he country's central bank system or by another government
~ h n ksuch as the postal savings banks of various European countries.
Thus there is no longer any market for domestic interlocal exchange.
T h e public is not charged more for an interlocal order to pay than

45 2
Human Action
for a local one or, if the charge is slightly different, it no longer has
any reference to the fluctuations of the interlocal movements of
currency within the country. I t is this government interference which
has sharpened the difference between domestic payment and payment abroad. Domestic payments are transacted at par, while with
regard t o foreign payments fluctuations occur within the limits
drawn b y the gold points.
If more than one kind of money is uscd as medium of exchange,
the mutual exchange ratio between thcm is determined b y their
purchasing power. T h e final prices of the various commodities, as
expressed in each of the t w o or several kinds of money, are in proportion to each other. T h e final exchange ratio between the various
kinds of money reflects their purchasing power with regard to the
commodities. ff any discrepancy appears, opportunity for profitable
transactions presents itself and the endeavors of businessmen eager
to take advantage of this opportunity tend to make it disappear again.
T h e purchasing-power parity theory of foreign exchange is merely
the application of the gcneral theorems conccrning the determination
of prices to the special case of the coexistence of various kinds of
money.
It does not matter whcthcr the various kinds of money coexist
in the same territory or whether their use is limited to distinct areas.
In any case the mutual exchange ratio between them tends to a final
state at which it no longcr makes any difference whcthcr one buys
and sells against this or that kind of money. As far as costs of intcrlocal transfer come into play, these costs must be added or deducted.
T h e changes in purchasi~gpower d o not occur at the same time
with regard to all commodities and services. Let us consider again
the practically very important instance of an inflation in one country only. ~ h c
increase in the quantity of domestic credit money or
fiat money affects at first only the prices of somc commodities and
services. T h e prices of the othcr commodities remain for some time
stiji ac their previous stand. T n e exchange rario between the domestic
currency and the foreign currencies is determined on the bourse, a
market organized and managed according to the pattern and the
commercial customs of the stock exchange. T h e dealers on this special
market are quicker than the rest of thc people in anticipating future
changes. Consequently the price structure of the market for foreign
exchange reflects the new7 money relation sooner than the prices of
many commodities and services. As soon as the domestic inflation begins to affect the prices of some con~rnodities,at any rate long before
it has exhausted all its effects upon the greater part of the prices of

Indirect Exchange

453

commodities and services, the price of foreign exchange tends to rise
to rhe point corresponding to the final state of domestic prices and
wage rates.
This fact has been entirely misinterpreted. People failed to realize
that the rise in foreign exchange rates merely anticipates the movement of domestic commodity prices. They explained the boom in
forcign exchange as an outcome of an unfavorable balance of payments. The demand for foreign exchange, they maintained, has been
increased by a deterioration of the balance of trade or of other items
of the balance of payments, or simply by sinister machinations on the
part of unpatriotic speculators. The higher prices to be paid for
foreign exchange cause the domestic prices of imported goods to
rise. The prices of the domestic products must follow suit because
otherwisc their low state would encourage business to withhold them
from domcstic consun~ptionand to sell them abroad at a premium.
The fallacies involved in this popular doctrine can casily be shown.
If the nominal income of the domestic public had not been increased
by the inffation, thcy would be forced to restrict their consumption
cither of imported or of domestic products. In the first case imports
would drop and in the second case exports would increase. Thus the
balance of trade would again be brought back to what the Mercantilists call a favorable state.
Pressed hard, the LMercantilistscannot help admitting the correctness of this reasoning. But, they say, it applies only to normal trade
conditions. I t does not take into account the state of affairs in countries which arc under the necessity of importing vital commodities
such as food and essential raw materials. The importation of such
goods cannot be curtailed below a certain minimum. They are imported no matter what prices must he paid for them. If the foreign
exchange required for importing them cannot be procured by an
adequate amount of exports, the balance of trade becomes unfavorable and the foreign exchange ratcs must rise more and more.
This is no less illusory than all other Mercantilist ideas. However
urgcnt and vital an individual's or a group of individuals' demand
for some goods may be, they can satisfy it on the market only by
paying the market price. If an Austrian wants to buy Canadian
wheat, he must pay the market price in Canadian dollars. He must
procure these Canadian dollars by exporting goods either directly
to Canada or to some other country. He does not increase the amount
of Canadian dollars available by paying higher prices (in schillings,
the Austrian domestic currency) for Canadian dollars. Moreover,
he cannot afford to pay such higher prices (in schillings) for imported

454
Human Action
wheat if his income (in schillings) remains unchanged. Only if the
Austrian Govcrnrnent embarks upon an inflationary policy and thus
increases the number of schillings in the pockets of its citizens, are
the Austrians in a position to continue to buy the quantities of
Canadian wheat they used to buy without curtailing other expenditures. If there were no domestic inflation, any rise in the price of imported goods would result either in a drop in their consumption or in
a restriction in the consumption of other goods. Thus the process
of readjustment as described above would have come into motion.
If a man lacks the money to buy bread from his neighbor, the village
baker, the cause is not to be seen in an alleged scarcity of money.
The cause is that this man did not succeed in earning the amount of
money needed either by selling goods or by rendering services for
which people are prepared to pay. The samc is true with regard to
international trade. A country may be distressed on account of the
fact that it is at a loss to sell abroad as tnany commodities as it would
have to sell in order to buy all the food its citizens want. But this
does not mean that foreign exchange is scarce. It means that the
residents are poor. And domestic inflation is certainly not an appropriate means to remove this poverty.
Keither has speculation any reference to the determination of
foreign exchange rates. The speculators merely anticipate the expected alterations. If they err, if their opinion that an inflation is in
progress is wrong, the structure of prices and foreign exchange rates
will not correspond to their anticipations and they will have to pay
for their mistakes by losses.
The doctrine according to which foreign exchange rates are determined by the balance of payments is based upon an illicit generalization of a special case. If two places, A and B, use the same kind of
money and if the residents do not want to make any changes in the
size of their cash holdings, over a given period of time the amount of
money paid from the residents of A to those of B equals the amount
paid frotn the residents of B to those of A and all payments can be
settled without shipping money from A to B or from R to A. Then
the rate of cabIe transfer B in A cannot rise above a point slightly
below the gold export point and cannot drop below a point slightly
above the gold import point, and vice versa. W7ithin this margin the
daiIy state of the balance of payments determines thc daily state of the
foreign exchange rate. This is the case only becausc neither the
residents of A nor those of B want to alter the amount of their cash
holdings. If the residents of A want to decrease their cash holdings
and those of B to increase theirs, money is shipped from A to B and

lndirect Exchange

45 5

the cable rate B reaches in A the gold export point. But money is not
shipped because A's balance of payments has become unfavorable.
TVhat is called b y the Mercantilists an unfavorable balance of payments is the effect of a deliberate restriction of cash holdings on the
part of the citizens of A and a deliberate increase in cash holdings on
the part of the citizens of B. If no resident of A were ready to rcduce
his cash holding, such an outflow of money from A could never
materialize.
?he difference between the tradc in money and that in the vendible
commodities is this: As a rule commodities move on a one-way road,
viz., from the places of surpIus production to those of surplus consumption. Consequently the price of a certain commodity in the
places of surplus ~roductionis as a ruIe lower by the amount of shipping costs than in the places of surplus consumption. Things are different with money if we do not takc into account the conditions of
the gold-mining countries and of those countries whose residents
dcliberately aim at altering the size of their cash holdings. Money
moves now this way, now that. At one time a country exports money,
at another time it imports moncy. Every cxporting country very
soon becomes an importing country precisely on account of its
previous exports. For this reason alone it is possibIe to save the costs
of shipping money b y the interplay of the market for foreign exchange.

16. Interest Ratcs and the Money Relation
A4oney plays in credit transactions the same role it plays in all other
business transactions. As a rule loans are granted in money, and interest and principal are paid in money. T h e payments resulting from
such dealings influence the size of cash holding onIy temporarily. T h e
recipients of loans, interest, and principal spend the sums received
either for consumption or for investment. They increase their cash
holdings only if definite considerations, independent of the inflow of
the money received, motivate them to act in this way.
The final state of the market rate of interest is the same for all
loans of the same character. Differences in the rate of interest are
caused either b y differences in the soundness and trustworthiness of
the debtor or by differences in the terms of the contract.21Differences
in interest rates which are not brought about by these differences in
conditions tend to disappear. T h e applicants ?or credits approach
the lenders who ask a lower rate of interest. T h e lenders are eager
2 I. For a more elaborate analysis, see below, pp. 536-545.

456
Human Action
to cater to people who are ready to pay higher interest rates. Things
on the money market are the same as on all other markets.
With regaid to interlocal credit transactions the interlocal exchange
rates are to be taken into account as well as differences in the monetary standard if there are any. I x t us contemplate the case of two
countries, A and 8.A is under the gold standard, B under the silver
standard. T h e lender who considers lending money from A to B must
first sell gold against silver and later, at the termination of the loan,
silver against gold. If at that later date the price of silver has dropped
as against gold, the principal repaid by the debtor (in silver) will
buy a smaller amount of gold than that expended by the creditor
when he previously embarked upon the transaction. H e will therefore only venture lending in B if the difference in the market rate
of interest between A and B is large enough to cover an expected fall
in the price of silver as against gold. T h e tendency toward an equalization of the market rate of interest for short-term loans which prevails
if A and R are both under the same monetary standard is seriously impaired under a diversity of standards.
If A and B are both under the same standard, it is impossible for
the banks of A to expand credit if those of B do not espouse the same
policy. Credit expansion in A malses prices rise, and short-term interest rates drop in A, while prices and interest rates in B remain unchanged. Consequently exports from A drop and imports to A increase. In addition, the money lenders of A become eager to lend on
the short-term loan market of B. T h e result is an external drain from
A which makes the money reserves of A's banks dwindIe. If the
banks of A do not abandon their expansionist policy, they will become insolvent.
This process has been entirely misinterpreted. People speak of an
important and vital function which a country's central bank has to
fulfill on behalf of the nation. I t is, they say, the central bank's sacred
duty to preserve the stability of foreign exchange rates and to protect
the natibn's gold reserve .against attacks on the part of foreign
speculators and their domestic abettors. T h e truth is that all that a
central bank does lest its gold reserve evaporate is done for the sake
of the preservation of its own solvency. It has jeopardized its financial
position by embarking upon credit kxpansion and must now undo
its previous action in order to avoid its disastrous consequences. Its
expansionist policy has encountered the obstacIes limiting the issuance
of fiduciary media.
T h e use of the terminology of warfare is inappropriate in dealing
with monetary matters, as it is in the treatment of all other catallactic

Indirect Exchange

457

problems. There is no such thing as a "war" between the central banks.
N o sinister forces arc "attacking" a bank's position and threatening
the stability of foreign exchange rates. N o "defender" is needed to
' L p r ~ t c ~at "
nation's currency system. It is, moreover, not true that
what prevents a nation's central bank or its private banks from lowering the domestic market rate of interest is considerations of the
preservation of the gold standard and of forcign exchange stability
and of frustrating the machinations of an international combine of
capitalistic moneylenders. The market rate of interest cannot be
lowered by a credit expansion except for a short time, and even then
it brings about all those effects which the theory of the trade c y c k
describes.
When the Bank of England redeemed a badmote issued according
to the terms of the contract, it did not render unselfishly a vital service
to the British people. It simply did what every housewife does in
paying the grocer's bill. T h e idea that there is some special merit in
a central bank's fulfillment of its voluntarily assumed responsibilities
could originate only because again and again governments granted
t o these banks the privilege of denying to their clicnts the payments
to which they had a legal title. In fact, the central banks became more
and more subordinate offices of the treasuries, mere tools for the
performance of credit expansion and inflation. It does not make any
difference practically whether they are or are not owned by the government and directly managed by government officials. In effect
the banks granting circulation credit are in every country today only
affiliates of the treasuries.
There is but one means of keeping a local and national currencJr
permanently at par with gold and foreign exchange: unconditional
redemption. T h e central bank has to buy at the parity rate any amount
of gold and forcign exchange offered against domestic banknotes
and deposit currency; on the other hand it has to sell, without discrimination, any amount of gold and foreign exchange asked for
by people ready to pay the parity price in domestic banknotes, coins,
or deposit currency. Such was the policy of central banks under the
gold standard. Such was also the policy of those governments and
central banks which had adopted the currency system commonly
known under the name of the gold exchange standard. T h e onli
difference between the "orthodox" or classical gold standard as it
existed in Great Britain from the early 'twenties of the nineteenth
century until the outbreak of the first WorId W a r and in other
countries on the one hand, and the gold exchange standard on the
other, concerned the use of gold coins on the domestic market. Under

458

Human Action

the classical gold standard a part of the cash holdings of the citizens
consisted in gold coins and the rest in money substitutes. Under
the gold exchange standard the cash holdings consisted entirely in
money-substitutes.
Pegging a certain rate of foreign exchange is tantamount to redemption at this rate.
A foreign exchange equalization account, too, can succeed in its
operations only as far as it clings to the same methods.
The reasons why European governments in the last few years have
preferred foreign cxchange equalization accounts to the operation
of central banks are obvious. Central bank legislation was an achievement of liberal governments or of governments which did not dare
to challenge openly, at least in the conduct of financial policies, public
opinion of the liberal countries. The operations of central banks were
therefore adjusted to economic freedom. For that reason they were
considered unsatisfactory in this age of rising totaIitarianism. The
main characteristics of the operation of a foreign exchange equalization account as distinguished from central bank policy are:
I. T h e authorities keep the transactions of the account secret. The
laws have obliged the central banks to publicize their actual status at
short intervals, as a rule every week. But the status of the foreign exchange equalization accounts is known only to the initiated. Officialdom renders a report to the public only after a lapse of time when
the figures are of interest to historians alone and of no use whatever
to the businessman.
z. This secrecy makes it possible to discriminate against people
not in great favor with the authorities. In many continental countries
of Europe it resulted in scandalous corruption. Other governments
used the power to discriminate to the detriment of businessmen belonging to linguistic or religious minorities or supporting opposition
parties.
3. A parity is no longer fixed by a law duly promulgated by parliamenr: and therefore known to every citizen. T h e determination depends upon the arbitrariness of bureaucrats. From time to time the
newspapers reported: The Ruritanian currency is weak. A more
correct description would have been: The Ruritanian authorities have
decided to raise the price of foreign ~xchange.?~
A foreign exchange equalization account is not a magic wand for
remedying the evils of inflation. It cannot apply any means other
than those available to "orthodox" central banks. A& it must, like
2 2 . Sec below, pp. 780-783.

Indirect Exchange

459

the central banks, fail in the endeavors to keep foreign exchange rates
at par if there is domestic inflation and credit expansion.
It has been asserted that the "orthodox" rnethods of fighting an
external drain by raising thc rate of discount no longer work because
nations are no longer prepared to comply with "the rules of the
game." Now, the gold standard is not a game, but a social institution.
Its working does not dcpend on the preparedness of any people to
observe some arbitrary rules. I t is controlled by the operation of inexorablc economic law.
The critics give point to their objection by citing the fact that
in the interwar period a rise in the rate of discount failed to stop the
external drain, i.e., the outflow of specie and the transfer of deposits
into foreign countries. But this phcnomenon was caused by the
governments' anti-gold and pro-inflation policies. If a man expects
that he will lose 40 per cent of his balance by an impending devaluation, he will try to transfer his deposit into another country and will
not change his mind if the bank rate in the country planning a dcvaluation rises I or z per cent. Such a rise in the rate of drscount is
obviously not a compensation for a loss ten or twenty or even forty
tilnes greater. Of course, the gold standard cannot work if governments are eager to sabotage its operations.
I

7. Secondary Media of Exchange

T h e use of money does not remove the differences which exist
between the various nonmonetary goods with regard to their marketability. Tn the money economy there is a very substantial difference
between the marketability of money and that of the vendible goods.
But there remain differences between the various specimens of this
latter group. F o r some of them it is easier to find without &lay a
buyer ready to pay the highest pricc which, under the state of the
market, can possibly be attained. With others it is morc difficult,
,4 first-class bond is more marketable than a house in 3 city's main
streer, and an old fur coat is more marketable than an autograph of
an eighteenth-century statesman. One no longer compares the marketability of the various vendible goods with the perfect marketability of money. One merely compares the degree of marketability of the various commodities. One may speak of the secondary
marketability of the vendible goods.
H e who owns a stock of goods of a high degree of secondary marketability is in a position to restrict his cash holding. H e can expect

460
Human Action
that when one day it is necessary for him to increase his cash holding
he will be in a position to sell thesc goods of a high dcgree of secondary
marketability without delay at the highest price attainable at the
market. Thus the size of a man's or a firm's cash holding is influencetl
b\; whether or not he owns a stock of goods with a high degree of
sfcondary marketability. T h e size of cash holding and the expcnsc
incurred in keeping it can be reduced if income-producing goods of
a high degree of secondary marketability are availabie.
Consequently there emerges a specific demand for such goods on
the part of people eager to kcep them in order to reduce the costs of
cash holding. T h e priccs of these goods are partly determined by
this specific demand; they would be lower in its absence. Thesc goods
are secondary media of exchange, as it were, and their exchange value
is the rcsultant of two kinds of demand: the demand rclated to their
services as secondary media of exchange, and the demand related to
the other services they render.
T h e costs incurred b y holding cash are equal t o thc amount of
interest which the sum concerned would havc borne when invested.
T h e cost incurred b y holding a stock of secondary media of exchange
consists in the difference between the interest yield of the securities
empIoyed for this purpose and the higher yield of other securities
which differ from the former only in regard to their lower marketability and are thereforc not suitcd for the role of secondary media
of exchange.
From time immemorial jewels have been used as secondary media
of exchange. Today the secondary media of exchange commonly
used arc:
I . Claims against banks, bankers, and savings banks which-although not money-substitutes "-arc
daily maturing or can be withdrawn on short notice.
z. Bonds whose volume and popularity are so great that it is, as a
rule. possible to sell moderate quantities of them without depressing
thc market.
;, Finally, sometimes even ccrtain especially marketablc stocks or
even commodities.
Of course, the advantages to be expected from lowering the costs
of holding cash must be confronted with certain hazards incurred.
T h e sale of securities and still more that of comrnoditics may only be
feasible with a loss. This danger is not present with bank balances
and the hazard of the bank's insolvency is usually negligible. Therefore interest-bearing claims against banks and bankers, which can be
23. For instance, demand deposits not subject to check.

Indirect Exchange
withdrawn at short notice, are the most popular secondary media of
exchange.
One must not confuse secondary media of exchange with moneysubstitutes. Money-substitutes are in the settlement of payments
given away and receivcd like money. But the secondary ~nediaof
exchange must first be exchanged against moncy or money-substitutes
if one wants to use them-in a roundabout way-for paying or for
increasing cash holdings.
Claims employed as secondary media of exchange have, because
of this ernploymcnt, a broader market and a higher price. T h e outcome of this is that they yield lower interest than claims of the same
kind which are not fit to serve as secondary media of cxchange. Government bonds and treasury bills which can be used as secondary
media of exchange can be floated on conditions more favorable to
the debtor than loans not suitable for this purpose. T h e debtors concerned are therefore eager to organize the market for their certificates
of indebtedness in such a way as to make them attractivc for those in
search of secondary media of exchange. Thcy are intent upon making
it possible for every holder of such securities to sell them or to use
them as collateral in borrowing under the most reasonablc terms. In
advertising their bond issues to the public they stress these opportunities as a special boon.
In the same way banks and bankers are intent upon attracting demand for secondary media of exchange. They offer convenient
terms to their customers. They try to outdo one another by shortening the time allowed for notice. Sometimes they pay interest even
for money maturing without notice. In this rivalry some banks have
gone too far and endangered their solvency.
Political conditions of the last decades have given to bank balances
which can be used as secondary media of exchange an increased importance. T h e governments of almost a11 countries are engaged in a
campaign against the capiralists. They are intent upon cspropriating
them by means of taxation and monetary measures. T h e capitalists
are eager t o protect their property b y keeping a p a n of their funds
liquid in order to evade confiscatory measures in time. They beep
balances with the banks of those countries in which the danger of
confiscation or currency devaluation is for the moment less than in
other countries. As soon as the prospects change, they transfer their
balances into countries which temporarily seem to offer more security.
It is these funds which people have in mind when speaking of "hot
money."
T h e significance of hot money for the constellation of monetary
L.

462
Human Action
affairs is the outcome of the one-reserve system. In order to make
it easier for the central banks to embark upon credit expansion, the
European governments aimed long ago at a concentration of their
countries' gold. reserves with the central banlis. T h e other banks
(the private banks, i.e., those not endowed with special privileges
and not entitled to issue banknotcs) restrict their cash holdings to the
requirements of their daily transactions. They no longer keep a
reserve against their daily maturing liabilities. They do not consider
it necessary to balance the maturity dates of their liabilities and
their assets in such a way as to be any day ready to comply unaided
with their obligations to their creditors. They rely upon the central
bank. When the creditors want to withdraw more than the "normal"
arnount, the private banks borrow the funds needed from the central
bank. A private bank considers itself liquid if it owns a sufficient
amount either of collateral against which the central bank will lend
or of bills of exchange which the central bank will r e d i s c o ~ n t . ~ ~
When the inflow of hot money began, the private banks of the
countries in which it was temporarily deposited saw nothing wrong
in treating these funds in the usual w-ay. They employed the additional
funds entrusted to them in increasing their loans to business. They
did not worry about the consequences, although they knew that
these funds would be withdrawn as soon as any doubts about their
country's fiscal or monetary policy emerged. T h e illiquidity of the
status of these banks was manifest: on the one hand large sums which
the customers had the right to withdraw at short notice, and on the
other hand loans to business which could be recovered only at a
later date. T h e only cautious method of dealing with hot money
would have been to keep a reserve of gold and foreign exchange
big enough to pay back the whole amount in case of a sudden withdrawal. Of course, this method would have required the banks to
charge the customers a commission for keeping their funds safe.
T h e showdown came for the Swiss banks on thc day in September,
1936, on which France devalued the French franc. 'The depositors
of hot money became frightened; they feared that Switzerland might
follow the French example. I t was to be expected that they would
all t r y to transfer their funds immediately to London or New York,
or even to Paris, which for the immediate coming weeks seemed to
offer a smaller hazard of currency depreciation. But the Swiss commercial banks were not in a position to pay back these funds without
24. All this refers to European conditions. American conditions differ only
technically, but not economically. However, the hot-money problem is not an
American problem, as there is, under the present state of affairs, no country
which a capitalist could deem a safer refuge than the United States.

Indirect Exchange

463

the aid of the National Bank. They had lent them to business-a great
part to business in countries which, by foreign exchange control, had
blocked their balances. The only way out would have been for them
to borrow from the National Bank. Then they would have maintained their own solvency. But the depositors paid would have immediately asked the hTational Bank for the redemption, in gold or
foreign exchange, of the banknotes received. If the National Bank
were not to comply with this request, it would thereby have actually
abandoned the gold standard and devalued the Swiss franc. If, on the
other hand, the Bank had redeemed the notes, it would have lost
the greater part of ics reserve. A panic would have resulted. The
Swiss then~selveswould have tried to procure as much gold and
foreign exchange as possible. The whole monetary system of the
country would havc collapsed.
The only alternative for the Swiss National Bank would havc
been not to assist the private banks at all. But this would have been
equivalent to the insolvency of the country's most important credit
institutions.
Thus for the Swiss Governincnt no choice was left. It had only
one means to prevent an economic catastrophe: to follow suit forthwith and to devalue the Swiss franc. The matter did not brook delay.
By and large, Great Britain, at the outbreak of the war in September,
1939, had to face similar conditions. The City of 1,ondon was once
the world's banking center. It has long since lost this function. But
foreigners and citizens of the Dominions still kept, on the eve of the
war, considerable short-term balances in the British banks. Besides,
there w-ere the large deposits due to the central banks in the "sterling
area." If the British Government had not frozcn all these balances by
means of foreign exchange restrictions, the insolvency of the British
banks would have become manifest. Foreign exchange control was
a disguised moratorium for the banks. It relieved them from the
plight of having to confess publicly their inability to fulfill their
obligations.

18. The Inflationist View of History

A very popular doctrine maintains that progressive lowering of
the monetary unit's purchasing power played a decisive role in historical evoIution. It is asserted that mankind would not have reached
its present state of well-being if the supply of money had not increased to a greater extent than the demand for money. The resulting fall in purchasing power, it is said, was a necessary condition of
economic progress. T h e intensification of the division of labor and

464
Human Action
the continuous growth of capital accumulation, which have centupled
the productivity of labor, could ensue only in a world of progressive
price rises. Inflation creates prosperity and wealth; deflation distress
and economic decay.25 A survey of political literature and of the
ideas that guided for centuries the monetary and credit policies of
the nations reveals that this opinion is almost generally accepted. In
spite of all warnings on the part of economists it is still today the core
of the layman's economic philosophy. I t is no less the essence of the
teachings of Lord Keynes and his disciples in both hemispheres.
T h e popularity of inflationism is in great part due to deep-rooted
hatred of creditors. Inflation is considered just because it favors
debtors at the expense of creditors. However, the inflationist view
of history which we have to deaI with in this section is only loosely
related to this anticreditor argument. Its assertion that "expansionism" is the driving force of economic progress and that "restrictionism" is the worst of all evils is mainly based on other arguments.
J t is obvious that the problems raised by the inflationist doctrine
cannot he solved by a recourse to the teachings of historical experience. It is beyond doubt that the history of prices shows, by and
large, a continuous, although sometimes for short periods interrupted, upward trend. I t is of course impossible to establish this fact
otherwise than by historica1 understanding. Catallactic precision cannot be applied to historical problems. T h e endeavors of some historians and statisticians to trace back the changes in the purchasing
power of the precious metals for centuries, and to measure them, are
futile. I t has been shown already that all attempts to measure economic
nlagnitudes are based on entirely falIacious assumptions and display
ignorance of the fundamental principles both of economics and of
history. But what history by means of its specific methods can tell
us in this field is enough to justify the assertion that the purchasing
power of money has for centuries shown a tendency to fall. With
regard to this point all people agree.
Hut this is not the proh!err? tc! be e!ucidatcd. T!x q l ~ e s d a !is~v+et!?er
the fall in purchasing power was or was not an indispensable factor
in the evolution which led from the poverty of ages gone hy to the
more satisfactory conditions of modern Western capitalism. This
question must bc answered without reference to the historical experience, which can be and always is interpreted in different ways,
and to which supporters and adversaries of every theory and of every
25. Cf. the critical study of Marianne von Herzfeld, "Die Geschichtc als Funktion der Geldbewegung," Archiv frier Sozialwissenscbaft, LVI, 654-686, and the
writings quoted in this study.

Indirect Exchange

465

explanation of history refer as a proof of their mutually contradictory and incompatible statements. W h a t is needed is a clarification
of the effects of changes in purchasing power on the division of labor,
the accumulation of capital, and tecl~nologicalimprovement.
In dealing with this problem one cannot satisfy oneself with the
refutation of the arguments advanced b y the inflationists in support
of their thesis. T h e absurdity of these arguments is so manifest that
their refutation and exposure is easy indeed. From its very beginnings
economics has shown again and again that assertions concerning the
alleged blessings of an abundance of money and the alleged disasters
of a scarcity of money are the outcome of crass errors in reasoning.
T h e endeavors of the apostles of inflationism and expansionism to
refute the correctness of the economists' teachings have failed utterly.
T h e only relevant question is this: Is it possible or not to lower
the rate of interest lastingly b y means of credit expansion? This
problem will be treated exhaustively in the chapter dealing with the
jnterconnection between the money relation and the rate of interest.
There it wilI be shown whar the consequences of booms created by
credit expansion must be.
13ut we must: ask ourselves at this point of our inquiries whether it
is not possibIe that there are other reasons which could be advanced
in favor of the inflationary interpretation of history. Is it not possible that the champions of inflationism have neglected to resort to
some valid arguments which could support their stand? It is certainly
necessary t o approach the issue from every possible avcnue.
Let us think of a world in which the quantity of money is rigid.
A t an early stage of history the inhasitants of this world have produced the whole quantity of the commodity employed for the monetary service which can possibly be produced. A further increase in
the quantity of money is out of the question. Fiduciary media are
unknown. All money-substitutes-the subsidiary coins included-are
money-certificates.
O n these assumptions the intensification of the division of labor, the
evolution from the economic self-sufficiency of ho~iseholds,villages,
districts, and countries to the world-embracing market system of
the nineteenth century, the progressive accumulation of capital,
and the itnprovement of technological methods of production wonld
have resdted in a continuous trend toward falling prices. Would
such a rise in the purchasing power of the monetary unit have stopped
the evolution of capitalism?
T h e average businessn~anwill answer this question in the affirmative. Living and acting in an environment in which a slow but continu-

466
Hzman Action
ous fall in the monctary unit's purchasing power is deemed normal,
necessary, and beneficial, he simply cannot comprehend a different
state of affairs. He associates the notions of rising prices and profits
on the one hand and of falling prices and losses on the other. The
fact that there are bear operations too and that great fortunes have
been made by bears does not shake his dogmatism. These are, he says,
merely speculative transactions of people eager to profit from the
fa11 in the prices of goods already produced and available. Creative
innovations, new investments, and the application of improved technological methods require the inducement brought about by the expectation of price rises. Economic progress is possible only in a world of
rising prices.
This opinion is untenable. In a world of a rising purchasing power
for the monetary unit everybody's mode of thinking would have
adjusted itself to this state of affairs, just as in our actual world it has
adjusted itself to a falling purchasing power of the monetary unit.
Today everybody is prepared to consider a rise in his nominal or
monetary income as an improvement of his material well-being.
People's attention is directed more toward the rise in nominal wage
rates and the money equivalent of wealth than to the increase in the
supply of commodities. In a world of rising purchasing power for the
monetary unit they would concern themselves more with the fall in
living costs. This would bring into clearer relief the fact that economic
progress consists primarily in making the amcnitics of life more easily
accessible.
In the conduct of business, reflections concerning the secular trend
of prices do not play any role whatever. Entrepreneurs and investors
do not bother about secular trends. What guides their actions is their
opinion about the movement of prices in the coming weeks, months,
or at most years. They do not heed the general movement of all
prices. What matters for them is the existence of discrepancies between the prices of the complementary factors of production and the
ar?ticipated prices nf the pmdum. No hnsinessmm emharks r
unon
--- a
definite production project because he beIieves that the prices, i.e., the
prices of all goods and services, will rise. H e engages himself if he
believes that he can profit from a difference between the prices of
goods of various orders. In a world with a secular tendency toward
falling prices, such opportunities for earning profit will appear in the
same way in which they appear in a world with a secular trend toward rising prices. The expectation of a general progressive upward
movement of all prices does not bring about intensified production
and improvement in well-being. It results in the "flight to real values,"

Indirect Exchange
in the crack-up boom and the complete breakdown of the monetary
system.
If the opinion that the prices of a11 comnlodities will drop becomes
general, the short-term rnarket rate of interest is lowered by the
amount of the negative price premium." Thus the entrepreneur
employing borrowed funds is secured against the consequences of
such a drop in prices to the same extent to which, under conditions of
rising prices, the lender is secured through the price premium against
the consequences of falling purchasing power.
A secular tendency toward a rise in the monetary unit's purchasing
pow-er would require rules of thumb on the part of businessmen and
investors other than those developed under the secular tendencv toward a fall in its purchasing power. But it would certainly not influence substantially the course of economic affairs. It would not remove the urge of people to improve their material well-being as far
as possible by an appropriate arrangement of production. It would
not deprive the economic system of the factors making for material
improvement, namely, the striving of enterprising promoters after
profit and the readiness of the public to buy those commodities
which are apt to provide them the greatest satisfaction at the lowest costs.
Such observations arc certainly not a plea for a policy of deflation.
They imply merely a refutation of the ineradicable inflationist fables.
They unmask the illusiveness of Lord Keynes's doctrine that the
source of poverty and distress, of depression of trade, and of unemployment is to be seen in a "contractionist pressure." It is not true
that "a deflationary pressure . . . would have . . . prevented the
development of modern industry." It is not true that credit expansion
brings about the "n~iracle . . . of turning a stone into bread." 27
Economics recommends neither inflationary nor deflationary policy. It does not urge the governments to tamper with the market's
choice of a medium of exchange. It establishes only the following
truths:
I . By committing itself to an inflationary or deflationary policy
a government does not promote the public welfare, the commonweal, or the interests of the whole nation. It merely favors one or
several groups of the population at the expense of other groups.
2 . It is impossible to know in advance which group will be favored
26. Cf.below, pp. j38-542.
27. Quoted from: International Clearing U n i ~ aT, e x t of a Paper Containing
Proposals by British Experts for a72 International Clearing Union, April 8, 1943
(published by British Information Services, an Agency of the British Government), p. 12.

468

I-luman Action

by a definite inflationary o r deflationary measure and to what extent.
These effects depend on the whole complex of the market data involved. T h e y also depend largely on the speed of the inflationary o r
deflationary movements and may be completely reversed with the
progress of these movements.
3. At any rate, an expansion results in misinvestment of capital
and overconsumption. I t leavcs the nation as a whole poorer, not
richer. These problcms are dealt with in Chapter XX.
4. Continued inflation must finally end in the crack-up boom, the
complete breakdown of the currency system.
5 . Deflationary policy is costly for the treasury and unpopular with
the masses. Rut inflationary policy is a boon for the treasury and very
popular with thc ignorant. PracticaIly, the danger of deflation is but
slight and the danger of inflation tremendous.

19. The G o l d Standard
Men have chosen the precious metals gold and silver for the money
service on account of thcir mineralogical, physical, and chemical
features. T h e use of money in a market economy is a praxeologically
necessary fact. That gold-and not something else-is used as money
is merely a historical fact and as such cannot be conceived b y catallactics. In monetary history too, as in all other branches of history,
one must resort to'historical understanding. If one takes pleasure in
calling the gold standard a "barbarous relic," 28 one cannot object to
the application of the same tern1 to every historically determined institution. Then the fact that the British speak English-and not
Danish, German, or French-is a barbarous relic too, and every
Rricon who opposes the substitution of Esperanto for English is no
less dogmatic and orthodox than those who d o not wax rapturous
about the plans for a managed currency.
T h e demonetization of silver and the establishment of gold monorr~ctallisnlwas the outcome of delibcrate government interference
with monetary matters. It is pointless to raise the question concerning what would have happened in the absence of these policies. But
it must not be forgotten that it was not the intention of the governments to establish the gold standard. W h a t the governments aimed at
was the double standard. T h e y wanted to substitute a rigid, government-decreed exchange ratio between gold and silver for the fluctuating market ratios betu-een the independently cocxktent gold and
28.

'944

Lord Keynes in the speech delivered before the House of Lords, may 23.

Indirect Exchange

469

silver coins. T h e monetary doctrines underlying these endeavors
~nisconstruedthe market phenomena in that complete way in which
only bureaucrats can misconstrue them. T h e attempts to create a
double standard of both metals, gold and silver, failed lamentably.
I t was this failure which generated the gold standard. T h e emergence
of the gold standard was the ~nanifestationof a crushing defeat of the
governments and their cherished doctrines.
In the seventeenth century the rates at which the English government tariffed the coins overvalued the guinea with regard to silver
and thus made the siIver coins disappear. Only those silver coins which
were much worn by usage or in any other way defaced or reduced in
n.eight remained in current use; it did not pay to export and to sell
then1 on the 1)ullion market. Thus England got the gold standard
against the intention of its government. Only much later the laws
made the de fncto gold standard a de jrwe standard. T h e government
abandoned further fruitless attempts to pump silvcr standard coins
into the market and minted silver only as subsidiary coins with a
limited legal tcnclcr power. These subsidiary coins were not money,
hut money-substitutes. Their exchange value depended not on their
silver content, but on the fact that they could be exchanged a t every
instant, without dclay and without cos;, at thcir full face value against
gold. T h e y were dc facto silvcr printed notes, claims against a definite
amount of gold.
Later in the course of the nineteenth century the double standard
resulted in a similar way in France and in the other countries of the
1,atin iMonctary Union in the emergence of de facto gold monometalI ism. When the drop in the price of silver in the latcr 'seventies would
autornaticalIy have effected the replacement of the de facto gold
standard by the de facto silver standard, these governments suspended
the coinage of silver in ordcr to preserve the gold standard. In the
United States the price structure on the bullion market had already,
before the outbreak of the Civil War, transformed rhe legal bimetallism into de facto gold monometallism. After the greengack period
there ensued a struggle between the friends of the gold standard on the
one hand and those of silver on the other hand. T h e result was a
victory for the gold standard. Once the economically most advanced
nations had adopted the gold standard, all other nations followed suit.
After the grcat inflationary adventures of the first World W a r most
countries hastened to return to the gold standard or the gold exchange standard.
T h e gold standard was the world standard of the age of capitalism,
increasing welfare, liberty, and democracy, both political and eco-

47O
Human Action
nomic. In the eyes of the free tradcrs its main eminence was precisely
the fact that it was an international standard as rcquired by international trade and the transactions of the international money and
capital market." It was the medium of exchange by means of which
Western industrialism and Western capital had borne Western civilization into the remotest parts of the earth's surface, everywhere
destroying the fetters of age-old prejudices and superstitions, sowing
the seeds of new life and new well-being, frecing minds and souls,
and creating riches unheard of before. It accompanied the triumphal
unprecedented progress of Western liberalism rcady to unite all
nations into a community of free nations peacefully cooperating
with one another.
It is easy to understand why people viewed the gold standard as the
symbol of this greatest and most bencficial of all historical changes.
1111those intent upon sabotaging the evolution toward welfare, peace,
frccdom, and democracy loathed the gold standard, and not only on
account of its cconornic significance. In their eyes the gold standard
was the labarum, the symbol, of all those doctrines and policies they
wanted to destroy. In the struggle against the gold standard much
more was at stake than commodity prices and foreign exchange rates.
The nationalists arc fighting the gold standard because they want
to sever their countries from the world market and to establish
national autarky as far as possible. Intervcntionist governmcnts and
pressure groups are fighting the gold standard because they consider
it the most scrious obstacle to their endeavors to manipulate prices and
wage rates. But the most fanatical attacks against gold are made by
those intent upon crcdit expansion. With them credit expansion is
the panacea for all economic ills. It could lower or even entirely
abolish interest rates, raise wages and prices for the benefit of all
except the parasitic capitalists and the exploiting employers, free the
state from the necessity of balancing its budget-in short, make all
decent people prosperous and happy. Only the gold standard, that
deviiifh contrivance of the wicked and stupid "orthodox" economists,
prevents mankind from attaining everlasting prosperity.
T h e gold standard is certainly not a perfect or ideal standard. There
is no such thing as perfection in human things. But nobody is in a
position to tell us how something more satisfactory couId be put in
place of the gold standard. The purchasing power of gold is not
stable. Rut the very notions of stability and unchangeability of purchasing power are absurd. In a living and changing world there can29. T. E. Gregory, T h e Gold Standard and Its Future (3d ed. London, 1934),
pp. 2 2 ff.

lndirect Exchange

471

not be any such thing as stability of purchasing power. In the imaginary construction of an evenly rotating economy thcre is no
room left for a medium of exchange. I t is an essential feature of
money that its purchasing pourer is changing. In fact, the adversaries
of the gold standard do not want to make money's purchasing power
stable. They want rather to give to the governments the power to
manipulate purchasing power without being hindered by an "external" factor, namely, the money relation of the gold standard.
The main objection raised against the gold standard is that it makes
operative in the determination of prices a factor which no government can control-the vicissitudes of gold production. Thus an
"external" or "automatic" force restrains a national government's
power to make its subjects as prosperous as it would like to make
them. The international capitalists dictate and the nation's sovereignty
becomes a sham.
However, the futility of interventionist policies has nothing at
all to do with monetary matters. It will be shown later why all isolated
measures of government interference with market phenomena must
fail to attain the ends sought. If the interventionist government wants
to remedy the shortcomings of its first interferences by going further
and further, it finally converts its country's economic system into
socialism of the German pattern. Then it abolishes the domestic market altogether, and with it money and all monetary problems, even
though it may retain some of the terms and labels of the market
economy.30In both cases it is not the gold standard that frustrates the
good intentions of the benevolent authority.
The significance of the fact that the gold standard makes the increase in the supply of gold depend upon the profitability of producing gold is, of course, that it limits the govcrnment7s power to
resort to inflation. The gold standard makes the determination of
money's purchasing power independent of the changing ambitions
and doctrines of political parties and pressure groups. This is not
a defect of the goid standard; it is its main exceiience. Every method
of manipulating purchasing power is by necessity arbitrary. All
methods recommended for the discovery of an allegedly objective
and "scientific" yardstick for monetary manipulation are based on
the illusion that changes in purchasing power can be "measured."
T h e goId standard removes the determination of cash-induced changes
in purchasing power from the political arena. Its general acceptance
requires the acknowledgment of the truth that one cannot make a11
people richer by printing money. The abhorrence of the gold standard
30. Cf. below, Chapters XXVII-XXXI.

472

Human Action

is inspired by the superstition that omnipotent governments can create
wealth out of little scraps of paper.
It has been asserted that the gold standard too is a manipulated
standard. The governments may influence the height of gold's purchasing power either by credi; expansion, even if it is kept within
the limits drawn by considerations of preserving the redeemability
of the money-substitutes, or indirectly by furthering measures which
induce people to restrict the size of their cash holdings. This is true.
It cannot be denied that the rise in commodity prices which occurred
between I 896 and 1914was to a great extent pEovolted by such government policies. But the main thing is that the gold standard keeps all
such endeavors toward lowering money's purchasing power within
narrow limits. The inflationists are fighting the gold standard precisely because thev consider these limits a serious obstacle to the
realization of their plans.
What the expansionists call the defects of the gold standard are
indeed its very eminence and uscfulness. It checks large-scale inflationary ventures on the part of governments. The gold standard
did not fail. The governments were eager to destroy it, because
they were committed to the fallacies that credit expansion is an
appropriate means of lowering the rate of interest and of "improving"
the baIance of trade.
N o government is, however, powerful enough to abolish the gold
standard. Gold is the money of international trade and of the supernational economic community of ~nankind.It cannot be affected by
measures of governments whose sovereignty is limited to definite
countries. As long as a country is not economically self-sufficient
in the strict sense of the term, as long as there are still some loopholes
left in the walls by which nationalistic governments try to isolatc
their countries from the rest of the world, gold is still used as money.
It does not matter that governments confiscate the gold coins aGd
bullion they can seize and punish those holding gold as felons. The
language of biiarerai clearing agreements by means of which governments are intent upon eliminating gold from international trade,
avoids any reference to gold. But the turnovers performed on the
ground of those agreements are calculated on gold prices. H e who
buys or sells on a foreign market calculates the advantages and disadvantages of such transactions in gold. In spite of the fact that a
country has severed its local currency from any link with gold, its
domestic structure of prices remains closely connected with gold
and the gold prices of the world market. If a government wants to
sever its domestic price structure from that of the world market, it

Indirect Exchange

47 3

must resort to other measures, such as prohibitive import and export
duties and embargoes. Nationalization of foreign trade, whether
effected openly o r directly b y foreign exchange control, does not
eliminate gold. T h e governments qua tradcrs are trading b y the usc
of gold as a medium of exchange.
T h e struggle against gold which is one of the main concerns of
all contemporary governments must not be looked upon as an isolated
phenomenon. It is but one item in the gigantic process of destruction
which is the mark of our time. People fight the gold standard because
they want to substitute national autarky for free trade, war for
peace, totalitarian government omnipotence for liberty.
It may happcn one day that technology will discover a method
of enlarging the supply i f gold at such a low cost that gold will become useless for the monetary service. Then people will have to
replace the gold standard by another standard. I t is futile t o bother
today about the way in which this problem will be solved. W e do not
know anything about thc conditions under which the decision will
have to be made.

International Monetary Cooperation
The international gold standard works without any action on the part of
governments. It is effective real cooperation of all members of the worldembracing market economy. There is no need for any government to interfere in order to make the gold standard work as an international standard.
What governments call international monetary cooperation is concerted
action for the sake of credit expansion. They have learned that credit expansion, when limited to one country only, results in an external drain.
They believe that it is only the extcrnal drain that frustrates their plans of
lowering the rate of interest and thus of creating an everlasting boom. If
all governments were to cooperate in thcir expansionist policies, they think,
they could remove this obstacle. What is required is an international bank
. .
issuiTig fibiiciary riiedia which arc dealt with as money-su'ustim~esby aii
people in all countries.
There is no need to stress again here the point that what makes it impossible to lower the ratc of interest by means of credit expansion is not merely
the external drain. This fundamental issue is dealt with exhaustively in
other chapters and sections of this book.31
But there is another important question to bc raised.
Let us assume that there exists an international bank issuing fiduciary
media the clientele of which is the world's whoIc population. It does not
matter whcther these money-substitutes go directly into the cash holdings
31. Cf. above, pp. 438-439, and below, pp. 547-583,

474

Human Action

of the individuals and firms, or are only kept by the various nations' central
banks as reserves against their issuance of national money-substitutes. The
deciding point is that there is a uniform world currency. The national
banknotes and checkbook money are redeemable in money-substitutes
issued by the international bank. The necessity of keeping its national eurrency at par with the international currency limits the power of every
nation's central banking system to expand credit. But the world bank is
restrained only by those factors which limit credit expansion on the part
of a single bank operating in an isolated economic system or in the whole
world.
W e may as well assume that the international bank is not a bank issuing
money-substitutes a part of which are fiduciary media, but a world
authority issuing international fiat money. Gold has been entirely demonetized. The only money in use is that created by the international
authority. The international authority is free to increase the quantity of
this money provided it does not go so far as to bring about the crack-up
boom and the breakdown of the currency.
Thcn the ideal of the Keynesians is realized. There is an institution
operating which can exercise an "expansionist prcssure on world trade."
It is free to pour a horn of plenty over the world.
However, the champions of such plans have neglected a fundamental
problem, namely, that of the distribution of the additional quantities of
this credit money or of this paper money.
Let us assume that the international authority increases the amount of its
issuance by a definite sum, all of which goes to one country, Ruritania. The
final result of this inflationary action will be a rise in prices of commodities
and services all over the world. But while this process is going on, the conditions of the citizens of various countries are affected in a different way.
The Ruritanians are the first group blessed by the additional manna. They
have more money in their pockets while the rest of the world's inhabitants
have not yet got a share of the new money. They can bid higher prices,
while the others cannot. Therefore the Ruritanians withdraw more goods
from the world market than they did before. The non-Ruritanians are
forced to restrict their consumption because they cannot compete with
the higher prices paid by the Ruritanians. While the process of adjusting
prices to the altered money relation is still in progress, the Ruritanians are
in an advantageous position against the non-Ruritanians. When the process
finally comes to an end, the Ruritanians have been enriched at the expense
of the non-Ruritanians.
T h e main problem in such expansionist ventures is the proportion according to which the additional money is to be allotted to the various
nations. Each nation will be eager to advocate a mode of distribution which
will give it the greatest possible share in the additional currency. The industrially backward nations of the East will, for instance, probably recommend equal distribution per capita of population, a mode which would
obviously favor them at the expenw of the industrially advanced nations.

Indirect Exchange

47 5

Whatever mode may be adopted, all nations would be dissatisfied and
would complain of unfair treatment. Serious conflicts would ensue and
would disrupt the whole scheme.
I t wouId be irrelevant to object that this problem did not play an important role in the negotiations which preceded the establishment of the InternationaI Monetary Fund and that it was easy to reach an agreement concerning the use of the Fund's resources. The Bretton Woods Conference
was held under very particular circumstances. Most of the participating
nations were at that time entirely dependent on the benevolence of the
United States. They would have been doomed if the United States had
stopped fighting for their freedom and aiding them materially by lendlease. The government of the United States, on the other hand, looked
upon the monetary agreement as a scheme for a disguised continuation of
lend-lease after the cessation of hostilities. The United States was ready to
give and the other participants-especially those of the European countries,
most of them at that time still entirely occupied by the German armies, and
those of the Asiatic countries-were ready to take whatever was offered to
them. The problems involved will become discernible as soon as the wartime attitude in the United States toward financial and trade matters is
replaced by a more realistic mentality.

XVIII. ACTION I N THE PASSING O F TIME
I.

Perspective in the Valuation of T i m e Periods

CTING man distinguishes the time before satisfaction of a want is

AAction
attained and the time for which the satisfaction continues.
always aims at the removal of future uneasiness, be it only
the future of the impending instant. Between the setting in of action
and the attainment of the end sought there always elapses a fraction
of time, viz., the maturing time in which the seed sown by the action
grows to maturity. T h e mast obvious example is provided by agriculture. Between the tilling of the soil and the ripening of the fruit there
passes a considerable period of time. Another example is the improvement of the quality of wine by aging. In some cases, however, the
maturing time is so short that ordinary speech may assert that the
success appears instantly.
As far as action requires the employment of labor, it is concerned
with the working time. T h e performance of every kind of labor
absorbs time. In some cases the working time is so short that people
say the performance requires no time at all.
Only in rare cases does a simple, indivisible and nonrepeated act
suffice to attain the end aimed at. As a rule what separates the actor
from the goal of his endeavors is more than one step only. H e must
make many steps. And every further step to be added to those previously made raises anew the question whether or not hc should
continue marching toward the goal once chosen. Most goals are so
far away that only determined persistence leads to them. Persever.-,.+.,- .--n:-nl.:--l.v
.--kf; .dLL;VlL,
U I I I I I I I C L I ~ ~ I&
~ ;C~ L
~ L C ~ to ihe eiid soiight, is rieeded in
order to succeed. T h e total expenditure of time required, i.e., working time plus maturing time, may be called the period of production.
T h e period of production is long in some cases and short in other
cases. I t is sometimes so short that it can be entirely negIectcd in
practice.
T h e increment in want-satisfaction which the attainment of the
end brings about is temporally limited. T h e result produced extends
services only over a period of time which we may call the duration
of serviceableness. T h e duration of serviceableness is shorter with

..-

Action in the Passing of Time
some products and longer with other goods which are commonly
called durable goods. Hence acting man must always take into account the period of production and the duration of serviceableness
of the product. In estimating the disutility of a project considered he
is not only concerned with the expenditure of material factors and
Iabor required, but also with the period of production. In estimating
the utility of the expected product he is concerned with the duration
of its serviceableness. Of course, the more durable a product is, the
greater is the amount of services it renders. But if these services are
not cumulatively available on the same date, but extended piecemeal
over a certain period of time, the time element, as will be shown,
pIays a particular role in their evaluation. I t makes a difference
whether n units of service are rendered on the same date or whether
they are stretched over a period of n days in such a way that only
one unit is available daily.
I t is important to realize that the period of production as well as
the duration of serviceableness arc categories of human action and
not concepts constructed by philosophers, economists, and historians
as mental tools for their in;erpretation of events. T h e y are essential
elements present in every act of reasoning that precedes and directs
action. It is necessary to stress this point because Bijhm-Bawerli, t o
whom economics owes the discovery of the role played b y the period
of production, failed to comprehend the difference.
Acting man does not look at his condition with the eyes of a historian. H e is not concerned with how the present situation originated.
His only concern is to make the best use of the means available today
for the best possible removal of future uneasiness. T h e past does not
count for him. H e has at his disposal a definite quantity of material
factors of production. H e does not ask whether these factors are
nature-given or the product of production processes accomplished
in the past. It does not matter for him how great a quantity of naturegiven, i.e., original material factors of production and labor, was
expended in rheir producrion and how much rime these processes of
production have absorbed. H e values the available means exclusively
from the aspect of the services they can render him in his endeavors
t o make future conditions more satisfactory. T h e period of production and the duration of serviceableness are for him categories in
planning future action, not concepts of academic retrospection and
historical research. They play a role in so far as the actor has t o
choose between periods of production of different length and between the production of more durable and less durable goods.
Action is not concerned with thc future in general, but always

478
Human Action
with a definite and limited fraction of the future. This fraction is
limited, on the one side, by the instant in which the action must take
place. Where its other end lies depends on the actor's decision and
choice. There are people who are concerned with only the impending instant. There are other people whose provident care stretches
far beyond the prospective length of their own life. W e may call the
fraction of future time for which the actor in a definite action wants
to provide in some way and to some extent, the period of provision.
In the same way in which acting man chooses among various kinds of
want-satisfaction within the same fraction of future time, he chooses
also between want-satisfaction in the nearer and in the remoter
future. Every choice implies also a choice of a period of provision.
In ~nakingup his mind how to employ the various means available
for the removal of uneasiness, man also determines implicitly the
period of provision. In the market economy the demand of the consumers also determines the length of the period of provision.
There are various methods available for a lengthening of the period
of provision:
I . The accumulation of larger stocks of consumers' goods destined
for later consumption.
2. The production of goods which are more durable.
3. The production of goods req~~iring
a longer period of production.
4. The choice of methods of production consuming more time
for the production of goods which could also be produced within
a shorter period of production.
The first two methods do not require any further comment. The
third and the fourth methods must be scrutinized more closely.
It is one of the fundamental data of human life and action that
the shortest processes of production, i.e., those with the shortest
period of production, do not remove felt uneasiness entirely. If all
those goods which these shortest processes can provide are produced,
unsatisfied wants remain and incentive to further action is stiii present.
As acting man prefers those processes which, other things being
equal, produce the products in the shortest tirne'l only such processes
are left for further action which consume more time. People embark
upon these more time-consuming processes because they value the
increment in satisfaction expected more highly than the disadvantage
of waiting longer for their fruits. Bohm-Bawerk speaks of the higher
productivity of roundabout ways of production requiring more
time. It is more appropriate to speak of the higher physical producI.

Why man proceeds in this way, will be shown on the following pages.

Action in the Passing of Tirne

479
tivity of production processes requiring more time. The higher
productivity of these processes does not always consist in the fact
that they produce-with the same quantity of factors of production
expended-a greater quantity of products. More often it consists in
the fact that they produce products which could not be produced
at all in shorter periods of production. These processes are not roundabout processes. They are the shortest and quickest way to the goal
chosen. If one wants to catch more fish, there is no other method
available than the substitution of fishing with the aid of nets and canoes
for fishing without the aid of this equipment. There is no better,
shorter, and cheaper method for the production of aspirin known
than that adopted by the chemical plants. If onc disregards error and
ignorance, there cannot be any doubt about the highest productivity
and expediency of the processes chosen. If people had not considered
them the most direct processes, viz., those leading by the shortest way
to the end sought, they would not have adopted them.
The lengthening of the period of provision through the mere accumulation of stocks of consumers' goods is the outcome of the desire
to provide in advance for a longer period of time. T h e same is valid
for the production of goods the durability of which is greater in
proportion to the greater expenditure of factors of production req~ired.
But
~ if temporally remoter goals are aimed at, Iengthening of
the period of production is a necessary corollary of the venture. The
end sought cannot be attained in a shorter period of production.
The postponement of an act of consumption means that the individual prefers the satisfaction which later consumption will provide
to the satisfaction which immediate consumption could provide. The
choice of a longer period of production means that the actor values
the product of the process bearing fruit only at a later date more
highly than the products which a process consuming less time could
provide. In such deliberations and the resulting choices the period
of production appears as waiting time. It was the great contribution
of Jevons and Bohm-Bawerk to have shown the role played by taking
account of waiting time.
If acting men were not to pay heed to the length of the waiting
time, they would never say that a goal is temporally so distant that one
cannot consider aiming at it. Faced with the alternative of choosing
between two processes of production which render different output
with the same input, they would always prefer that process which
z. If the lengthening of durability were not at least proportionate to the increment in expenditure needed, it would be more advantageous t o increase the
quantity of units of a shorter durability.

480
Human Action
renders the greater quantity of the same products or better products
in the same quantity, even if this result could be attained onIy by
lengthening the period of production. Increments in input which
result in a more than proportionate increase in the products' duration
of serviceableness would unconditionally be deemed advantageous.
The fact that men do not act in this way evidences that they value
fractions of time of the same length in a different way according as
they are nearer or remoter from the instant of the actor's decision.
Other things being equal, satisfaction in a nearer period of the future
is preferred to satisfaction in a more distant period; disutility is seen
in waiting.
This fact is already implied in the statement stressed in the opening
of this chapter that man distinguishes the time before satisfaction is
attained and the time for the duration of which there is satisfaction.
If any role at all is played by the time element in human life, there
cannot be any question of equal valuation of nearer and remoter
periods of the same length. Such an equal valuation would mean that
people do not care whether success is attained sooner or later. It
would be tantamount to a complete elimination of the time element
from the process of valuation.
T h e mere fact that goods with a longer duration of serviceableness
are valued more highly than those with a shorter duration does not
yet in itsclf imply a consideration of ti~ne.A roof that can protect
a house against the weather during a period of ten years is more
valuable than a roof which renders this service only for a period of
five years. The quantity of service rendered is different in both cases.
But the question which we have to deal with is whether or not an actor
in malting his choices attaches to a service to be available in a later
period of the future the same value he attaches to a service available
at an earlier period.
2.

Time Preference as an EssentiaI Requisite of Action

The answer to this question is that acting man does not appraise
time periods merely with regard to their dimension. His choices regarding the removal of future uneasiness are directed by the categories sooner and later. Time for man is not a homogeneous substance
of which only length counts. It is not a more or a less in dimension.
It is an irreversible flux the fractions of which appear in different
perspective according to whether they are nearer to or remoter from
the instant of valuation and decision. Satisfaction of a want in the
nearer future is, other things being equal, preferred to that in the

Action in the Pnssin.g of Time

481
farther distant future. Present goods are more valuable than future
goods.
Time prefercnce is a categorial requisite of human action. N o mode
of action can be thought of in which satisfaction within a nearer
period of the future is not-other
things being equal-preferred
to that in a later period. The very act of gratifying a desire implies
that gratification at the present instant is preferred t o that a t a later
instant. H e who consumcs a nonperishable good instead of postponing
consumption for an indefinite later moment thereby revcals a higher
valuation of present satisfaction as compared with later satisfaction.
If he were not t o prefer satisfaction in a nearer period of the future
to that in a remoter period, he would never consume and so satisfy
wants. H e would always accumulate, he would never consume and
enjoy. H e wouId not consume today, but he would not consume tomorrow either, as the morrow would confront him with the same
alternative.
Not only the first step toward want-satisfaction, but also any
further step is guided by time prefercnce. Once the desire a: to which
the scale of values assigns the rank I is satisfied, one must choose between the desire b to which the rank 2 is assigned and c that desire
of tomorrow to which-in the absence of time preference-the rank
I would have been assigned. If b is preferred to c, the choice clearly
involves time preference. Purposive striving after want-satisfaction
must needs be guided b y a preference for satisfaction in the nearer
future over that in a remoter future.
T h e conditions under which modern man of the capitalist West
must act are different from those under which his primitive ancestors
lived and acted. As a result of the providential care of our forebears
we have at our disposal an ample stock of intermediate products
(capital goods o r produced factors of production) and of consumers'
goods. O u r activities arc designed for a longer period of provision because we are the lucky heirs of a past which has lengthened, step by
step, the period of provision and has bequeathed t o us the meam to
expand the waiting period. I n acting we are concerned with longcr
periods and are aiming at an even satisfaction in all parts of the
period chosen as the period of provision. W e are in a position to relv
upon a continuing influx of consun~ers'goods and have at our disposal not only stocks of goods ready for consumption but also
stocks of pro&ccrs' goods out of which our continuous efforts again
and again make new consumers' goods mature. In our dealing with
this increasing "stream of income," says the superficial observer,
there is no heed paid to any considerations related to a different

482
Human Action
valuation of present and of future goods. W e synchronize, he asserts,
and thus the time element loses any importance for the conduct of
affairs. It is, therefore, pointless, he continues, in the interpretation
of modern conditions to resort to time preference.
T h e fundamental error involved in this popular objection is caused,
like so many other errors, by a lamentable misapprehension of the
imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy. In the frame
of this imaginary construction no change occurs; there prevails an
unvarying course of all affairs. In the evenly rotating economy consequently nothing is altered in the allocation of goods for the satisfaction of wants in nearer and in remoter periods of the future. hTo
one pIans any change because-according to our assumptions-the
prevailing allocation best serves him and because he does not believe
that any possible rearrangement could improve his condition. N o
one wants to increase his consumption in a nearer period of the future at the expense of his consumption in a more distant period or
vice versa because the existing mode of alIocation pleases him better
than any other thinkable and feasible mode.
T h e praxeological distinction between capital and income is a
category of thought based on a different valuation of want-satisfaction in various periods of the future. In the imaginary construction
of the evenly rotating economy it is implied that the whole income
but not more than the income is consumed and that therefore the
capital remains unchanged. An equilibrium is reached in the allocation of goods for want-satisfaction in different periods of the future.
It is permissible to describe this state of affairs by asserting that nobody wants to consume tomorrow's income today. W e have precisely
designed the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy
in such a way as to make it fit just this condition. But it is necessary
to realize that we can assert with the same apodictic assurance that,
in the evenly rotating economy, nobody wants to have more of any
commodity than he really has. These statements arc true with regard
to the evenly rotating economy because they are implied in our definition of this imaginary construction. They are nonsensical when asserted with regard to a changing economy which alone is real. As soon
as a change in the data occurs, the individuals are faced anew with the
necessity of choosing both between various modes of want-satisfaction in the same period and between want-satisfaction in different
periods. An increment can be either employed for immediate consumption or invested for further production. No matter how the
actors employ it, their choice must needs be the result of a weighing
of the advantages expected from want-satisfaction in different periods

Action in the Passing of Time
of the future. In the world of reality, in the living and changing universe, each individual in each of his actions is forced t o choose between satisfaction in various periods of time. Some people consume
all that they earn, others consume a part of their capital, others save
a part of their income.
Those contesting the universal validity of time preference fail to
explain w h y a man does not always invest a sum of ~ o o
dollars available today, although these ~ o odollars would incrcase to 104 dollars
within a year's time. It is obvious that chis man in consuming this
sum today is determined by a judgment of value which values loo
present dollars higher than I 04 dollars available a year later. But even
in case he chooses to invest these loo dollars, the meaning is not that
he prefers satisfaction in a later period to that of today. It means that
he values roo dollars today less than 104 dollars a year latcr. Every
penny spent today is. precisely under the conditions of a capitalist
economy in which institutions make it possible to invest even the
smallest sums, a proof of the higher valuation of present satisfaction
as compared with later satisfaction.
T h e theorem of time preference must be demonstrated in a double
way. First for the case of plain saving in which people must choose
between the immediate consumption of a quantity of goods and the
later consumption of the same quantity. Second for the case of capitalist saving in which the choice is to be made between the immediate
consumption of a quantity of goods and the later consumption either
of a greater quantity or of goods which are fit to provide a satisfaction
which-except for thc difference in time-is valued more highly. T h e
proof has been given for both cases. N o other case is thinkable.
I t is possiblc t o search for a psychological understanding of the
problem of time preference. Impatience and the pains caused b y
waiting are certainly psychological phenomena. One may approach
their clucidation b y referring to the temporal limitations of human
life, to the individual's coming into existence, his growth and maturing, and his inevitable decay and passing away. There is in the course
of man's life a right moment for everything as well as a too early and
a too late. However, the praxeological problem is in no way related
t o psychological issues. W e must conceive, not merely understand.
W e must conceive that a man who docs not prefer satisfaction within
a nearer period of the future to that in a rcmotcr period would never
achieve consumption and enjoyment at all.
Neither must the praxeological problem be confused with the
physiological. H e who wants to live to see the later day, must first
of all care for the preservation of his life in the intermediate period.

484
Human Action
Survival and appeasement of vital needs are thus requirements for the
satisfaction of any wants in the remoter future. This makes us understand why in all those situations in which bare life in the strict sense
of the term is at stake satisfaction in the nearer future is preferred to
that in later periods. But we are dealing with action as such, not with
the motives directing its course. In the same way in which as economists we do not ask why albumin, carbohydrates, and fat are demanded by man, we do not inquire why the satisfaction of vital needs
appears imperative and does not brook any delay. W e must conceive
that consumption and enjoyment of any kind presuppose a preference
for present satisfaction to later satisfaction. The ltnowledge provided
by this insight far exceeds the orbit for which the physiological facts
concerned provide explanation. It refers to every kind of want-satisfaction, not only to the satisfaction of the vital necessities of mere
survival.
It is important to stress this point because the term "supply of
subsistence, availabIe for advances of subsistence," as used by BijhmBawerk, can easily be misinterpreted. It is certainly one of the tasks
of this stock to provide the means for a satisfaction of the bare necessities of life and thus to secure survival. But besides it must be large
enough to satisfy, btyond the requirements of necessary maintenance
for the waiting time, all those wants and desires which-apart from
mere survival-are considered more urgent than the harvesting of
the physically more abundant fruits of production processes consuming more time.
Biihm-Bawerk declared that every lengthening of the period of
production depends on the condition that "a sufficient quantity of
present goods is available to make it possible to overbridge the
lengthened average interval between the starting of preparatory work
and the harvesting of its product." The expression "sufficient quantity" needs elucidation. It does not mean a quantity sufficient for
necessary sustenance. The quantity in question must be large enough
to secure the sarisfacrion of aii rhose wants rhe satisfacrion of which
during the waiting time is considered more urgent than the advantages
which a still greater lengthening of the period of production would
provide. If the quantity in question were smaller, a shortening of the
period of production would appear advantageous; the increase in the
quantity of products or the improvement of their quality to be expected-from the preservation of the longer period of production
would no longer be considered a sufficient remuneration for the
3. Cf. Bohm-Bawerk, Kleinere Abhandlungen iiber Kapital und Zins, vol. I1 in
Qesamelte Schriften, ed. F. X . Weiss (Vienna, 1926), P. 1%.

Action in the Passing of Time

485

restriction of consumption enjoined during the waiting time. Whether
o r not the supply of subsistence is sufficient, does not depend on any
physiological o r other facts opcn t o objective determination by the
methods of technology and physiology. T h e metaphorical term
"overbridge," suggesting a body of water the breadth of which poses
t o the bridge builder an objectively determined task, is misleading.
T h e quantity in question is valued by men, and their subjective judgments decide whether o r not it is sufficient.
Even in a hypothetical world in which nature provides every man
with the means for the preservation of biological survival (in the
strict sense of the term), in which the most important foodstuffs
arc not scarce and action is not concerned with the provision for bare
life, the phenomenon of time preference would be present and direct
a11 acti0ns.l

Observations on the Evolution of the Time-Preference Theory
It seems plausible to assume that the mere fact that interest is graduated
in reference to periods of time should have directed the attention of the
economists, intent upon developing a theory of interest, upon the role
played by time. However, the classical economists were prevented by their
faulty theory of value and their niisconstruction of the cost concept from
recognizing the importance of the time element.
Economics owes the time-preference theory to William Stanley Jevons
and its elaboration, most of all, to Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk. Biihnl-Bawerk
was the first to formulate correctly the problem to be solved, the first to
unmask the fallacies implied in the productivity theories and the first to
stress the role played by the period of production. But he did not entirely
succeed in avoiding the pitfalIs in the elucidation of the interest problem.
His demonstration of the universal validity of time preference is inadequate because it is based on psychological considerations. However, psyzhology can never demonstrate the validity of a praxeological theorem. It
may show that some people or many people let themselves be influenced
by certain motives. It can never make evident that all human action is
necessarily dominated by a definite catcgorial clement which, without
any exception, is operative in every instance of a ~ t i o n . ~
The second shortcoming of Bohm-Bawerk's reasoning was his misconstruction of the concept of the period of production. H e was not fully
aware of the fact that the period of production is a praxeological category
4. Time preference is not specifically human. It is an inherent feature of the
behavior of all living beings. The distinction of man consists in the very fact that
with him time preference is not inexorable and the lengthening of the period of
provision not merely instinctive as with certain animals that store food, but the
result of a process of valuation.
5. For a detailed critical analysis of this part of Bohm-Bawerk's reasoning the
reader is referred to Mises, Nationalokonomie, pp. 439-443.

Human Action
and that the role it plays in action consists entirely in the choices acting
man makes between periods of production of different length. T h e length
of time expended in the past for the production of capital goods available
today does not count at all. These capital goods are valued only with regard to their usefulness for future want-satisfaction. T h e "average period
of production" is an empty concept. What determines action is the fact
that in choosing among various ways which can remove future uneasiness
the length of the waiting time in each case is a necessary element.
It was an outcome of these two errors that Bohm-Bawerk in the elaboration of his theory did not entirely avoid the productivity approach which
he himself had so brilliantly refuted in his critical history of the doctrines
of capital and interest.
These observations do not detract at all from the imperishable merits of
Bohm-Bawerk's contributions. It was on the foundation laid by him that
later economists-foremost among them Knut Wicksell, Frank Albert
Fetter and Irving Fisher-were successful in perfecting the time-preference
theory.
It is customary to express the essence of the time-preference theory by
saying that there prevails a preference for present over future goods. In
dealing with this mode of expression some economists have been pu~zled
by the fact that in some cases present uses are worth less than future uses.
However, the problem raised by these apparent exceptions is caused merely
by an misapprehension of the true state of affairs.
There are enjoyments which cannot be had at the same time. A man cannot on the same evening attend performances of Carmen and of liamlet.
In buying a ticket he must choose between the two performances. If tickets
to both theaters for the same evening are presented to h i ~ nas a gift, he must
likewise choose. H e may think with regard to the ticket which he refuses:
"1 don't care for it just now," or "If only it had been later." However,
this does not mean that he prefers future goods t o present goods. H e does
not have to choose between future goods and present goods. H e must
choose between two enjoyments both of which he cannot have together.
This is the dilemma in every instance of choosing. In the present state of
his affairs he may prefer Hamlet to Carmen. T h e different conditions of a
later date may possibly result in another decision.
T h e second seeming exception is presented by the case of pcrishable
goods. They may be available in abundance in one season of the year and
may be scarce in other seasons. However, the difference between ice in
winter and ice in summer is not that between a present good and a future
good. It is the difference between a good that loses its specific usefulness
even if not consumed and another good which requires a different process
of production. Ice available in winter can only be used in summer when
subjected to a special process of conservation. It is, in respect to ice utilizable in summer, at best one of the complementary factors required for
production. It is impossible to increase the quantity of ice available in sum6. Cf. F. A. Fetter, Economic Principles (New York, rgzj), I, 239.

Action in the Passing of Time

487
mer simply by restricting the consumption of ice in winter. The two things
are for all practical purposes different commodities.
The case of the miser does not contradict the universal validity of time
preference. The miser too, in spending some of his means for a scanty livelihood, prefers some amount of satisfaction in the nearer future to that in
the remoter future. Extreme instances in which the miser denies himself
even the indispensable minimum of food represent a pathological withering
away of vital energy, as is the case with the man who abstains from eating
out of fear of morbific germs, the man who commits suicide rather than
mect a dangerous situation, and the man who cannot sleep because he is
afraid of undetcrmined accide~tswhich could befall him w-hile asleep.
3. Capital Goods

As soon as those present wants are sated the satisfaction of which
is considered more urgent than any provision for the morrow,
people begin to save a part of the available supply of consumers' goods
for later use. This postponement of consumption makes it possible
to direct action toward temporally remoter ends. It is now feasible
to aim at goals which could not be thought of before on account of
the length of the period of production required. I t is furthermore
fea5ibIe t o choose methods of production in which the output of
products is greater per unit of input than in other methods requiring
a shorter period of production. T h e sine qua non of any lengthening
of the processes of production adopted is saving, i.e., an excess of
current production over current consumption. Saving is the first
step on the way toward irnprovement of material well-being and
toward every further progress on this way.
T h e postponement of consumption and the accumulation of stocks
of consumers' goods destined for later consumption would be practiced even in the absence of the stimulus offered by the technological
superiority of processes with a longer period of production. T h e
higher productivity of such processes consuming more time strengthens considerably the propensity to save. T h e sacrifice made by restricting consumption in nearer periods of the future is henceforth
not only counrcrbalanced by the expectation of consuming the saved
goods in remoter periods; it also opens the way to a more ample supply in the remoter future and to the attainment of goods which could
n i t be procured at all without this sacrifice. If acting man, other conditions being equal, were not to prefer, w-ithout exception, consumption
in the nearer future to that in the remoter future, he would always
save, ncver consume. What restricts the amount of saving and investment is time preference.

488
Human Action
People eager to cmbark upon processes with a longer period of
production must first accumulate, by means of saving, that quantity
of consumers' goods which is needed to satisfy, during the waitink
time, all those wants the satisfaction of which they considcr more
urgcnt than thc increment in well-being expccted from the more
time-consuming process. Accun~ulationof capital begins with the
formation of stocks of consumers' goods thc consumption of which
is postponed for latcr days. If thesc surpluses are rnerely stored and
kept for latcr consumption, they are simply wealth or, more precisely,
a reserve for rainy days and emergencies. 'lhey remain outside the
orbit of production. They become integrated-economically,
not
physically-into production activities only when crnployed as means
of subsistence of workcrs engagcd in more time-consuming processes.
If expended in this way, they are physically consumed. But economically they do not disappear. They are replaced first by the intcr~nediaryproducts of a process with a longer period o i production
and then latcr by the consumers' goods which arc the final product
of these processes.
All these ventures and processes arc intcllcctually controlled by
capital accounting, the acme of cconornic calculation in monetary
terms. Without the aid of monetary calculation men could not cvcn
Iearn whether-apart from the length of the period of production-a
definite proccss pron~isesa higher productivity than another. T h e
cxpcnditures required by various processes cannot be weighed against
one another without the aid of monetary terms. Capital accounting
starts with thc market prices of the capital goods availabIe for further
production, the sun1 of which it calls capital. It records cvcry expenditure from this fund and the price of all incoming items induced
by such expenditure. It establishcs finally the uItimatc outcome of all
these transformations in the composition of the capital and thereby
the success or the failure of thc whole process. It shows not only the
final result; it mirrors also every one of its intermediary stages. It
produces intcrinl balances for e;ery day such a balance h a y h e required and statements of profit and loss for every part or stage of the
proccss. It is the indispcnsabIe compass of production in the market economy.
In the market economy production is a continuous, never-ending
pursuit split up into an immense variety of partiaI proccsscs. Innumerable proccsscs of production with different periods of production are
in progress sitnultaneously. T h c y cornplenlent one another and at
the same time are in rivalry with one another in competing for scarce
factors of production. Continuously either new capital is accumulated

Action in the I'nssing of Time

489
b y saving or previously accumulated capital is eaten up by overconsumption. production is distributed among numerous individual
plants, farms, workshops, and enterprises each of which serves only
limited purposes. The intermediary products or capital goods, the
produced factors of further production, change hands in the course
of evcnts; they pass from one plant to another until finally the consumers' goods reach those who use and enjoy them. T h e social
process of ~roductionnever stops. At each instant numberless processes are in progress some of which arc nearer to, some remoter from,
the achievement of their special tasks.
Every single performance in this ceaseIess pursuit of wealth production is based upon the saving and the preparatory work of earlier
generations. W e are the lucky heirs of our fathers and forefathers
whose saving has accumulated the capital goods with the aid of
which we are working today. W e favorite children of the age of
electricity stiIl derive advantagc from the original saving of the
primitive fishermen who, in producing the first nets and canoes, devoted a part of their working time to provision for a remoter future.
If the sons of these legendary fishermen had worn out these intermediary products-nets and canoes-without replacing them by new
ones, they would have consumed capital and the process of saving
and capital accumulation would have had to start afresh. W e are
better off than earlier generations because we are equipped with the
capital goods they have accumulated for us.7
T h e businessman, thc acting man, is entirely absorbed in one task
only: to take best advantage of all the means availablc for the improvement of future conditions. H e does not look at the present
state of affairs with the aim of analyzing and comprehending it. In
cIassifying the means for further iroduction and appraising their
importance he adopts superficial rules o f thumb. H e distinguishes
three classes of factors of production: the nature-given material
factors, the human factor-labor, and capital goods-the intermediary
factors produced in the past. I l e does not analyze the nature of the
capital goods. They are in his cyes means of increasing the productivity of labor. Q U ~
nai'vely he ascrilm to them productive power
of their own. H e does not trace their instrumentality bad- to nature
and labor. H e does not ask how they came into existence. They count
only as far as they may contribute to the success of his efforts.
This mode of reasoning is all right for the businessman. But it was
7. These considerations explode the objections raised against the time-preference cheory by Frank H. Knight in his arriclc, "Capital, 'Time and the Interest
Hate," Economics, n.s., I, 257-286.

490
Human Action
a serious mistake for the economists to agree with the businessman's
superficial view. They erred in classifying "capital" as an independent
factor of production along with the nature-given material resources
and labor. The capital goods-the factors of further production produced in the past-are not an independent factor. They are the joint
products of the cooperation of the two original factors-nature and
labor-expended in the past. They have no productive power of
their own.
Neither is it correct to call the capital goods labor and nature
stored up. They are rather labor, nature, and time stored up. The
difference between production without the aid of capital goods and
that assisted by the employment of capital goods consists in time.
Capital goods are intermediary stations on the way leading from the
very beginning of production to its final goal, the turning out of
consumers' goods. H e who produces with the aid of capital goods
enjoys one great advantage over the man who starts without capital
goods; he is nearer in time to the ultimate goal of his endeavors.
There is no question of an aIleged productivity of capital goods.
The difference between the price of a capital good, e.g., a machine,
and the sum of the prices of the complementary original factors of
production required for its reproduction is entirely due to the time
difference. H e who employs the machine is nearer the goal of production. The period of production is shorter for him than for a competitor who must start from the beginning. In buying a machine he
buys the original factors of production to be expended in its reproduction plus time, i.e., the time by which his period of production is
shortened.
The value of time, i.e., time preference or the higher valuation of
want-satisfaction in nearer periods of the future as against that in
remoter periods, is an essential element in human action. It determines
every choice and every action. There is no man for whom the difference between sooner and later does not count. The time element is
instrumental in the formation of all prices of all commodities and
services.
4. Period of Production, Waiting Time, and
Period of Provision
If one were to measure the length of the period of production spent
in the fabrication of the various goods available now, one would
have to trace back their history to the point at which the first expenditure of original factors of production took place. One would

Action in the Passing of Time

497
have to establish when natural resources and labor were first employed for processes which-besides contributing t o the production
of other goods-also contributed ultimately to the production of
the good in question. The solution of this problem would require
the solubiIity of the problem of physical imputation. It would be
necessary to establish in quantitative terms to what extent tools,
raw materials, and labor which directly or indirectly were used in
the production of the good concerned contributed to the result. One
would have to go back in these inquiries to the very origins of capital
accunmlation by saving on the part of people who previously lived
from band to mouth. It is not only practical difficulties which prevent
such historical studies. The very insolubility of the problem of physical imputation stops us at the first step of such ventures.
Keither acting man himself nor economic theory needs a measurement of the time expended in the past for the production of goods
available today. They would have no use for such data even if they
kncw them. Acting man is faced with the problem of how to take
bcst advantage of the available supply of goods. He makes his choices
in employing each part of this supply in such a way as to satisfy
the most urgent of the not yet satisfied wants. For the achievcment
of this task he must know the length of the waiting time which separates him from the attainment of the various goals among which he has
to choose. As has been pointed out and must be emphasized again,
there is no need for him to look backward to the history of the
various capital goods available. Acting man counts waiting time and
the period of production always from today on. In the same way in
which there is no need to know whether more or less labor and
material factors of production have been expendcd in the production
of the products available now, there is no need to know whether their
production has absorbed more or less time. Things are valued exclusively from the point of view of the services they can render for
the satisfaction of future wants. The actual sacrifices made and the
time absorbed in their production are beside the point. These things
belong to the dead past.
It is necessary to realize that all cconomic categories are related
to human action and have nothing at a11 to do directly with the
physical properties of things. Economics is not about goods and
services; it is about human choice and action. The praxeological concept of time is not the concept of physics or biology. It refers to the
sooner or thc later as operative in the actors' judgments of vaIue. The
distinction between capital goods and consumers' goods is not a rigid
distinction based on the physical and physiological properties of the

492
Human Action
goods concerned. It depends on the position of the actors and the
choices they have to make. T h e same goods can be looked upon as
capital goods and as consun~ers'goods. A supply of goods ready for
immediate enjoyment is capital goods from the point of view of a
man who looks upon it as a means for his own sustenance and that of
hired worlrcrs during a waiting time.
An increase in the quantity of capital goods available is a necessary
condition for thc adoption of processes in which the period of
production and therefore waiting time are longer. If one wants to
attain ends which are temporally farther away, one must resort to
a longer period of production bccause it is impossible to attain the
end sought in a shorter period of production. If one wants to resort
to methods of production with which the quantity of output is higher
per unit of input expended, one must lengthen the period of production. For the processes with which output is smaller per unit of input
have been chosen only on account of the shorter period of production
they require. But on the other hand, not cvcry employment chosen for
the utilization of capital goods accumulated by means of additional
saving requires a process of production in which the period of production from today on to the maturing of the product is longer than
with all processes already adopted previously. I t may be that pcoplc,
having satisfied thcir more urgent needs, now want goods which
can be produced w-ithin a comparatively short period. T h e reason
why these goods have not been produced previously was not that the
period of production required for them alone was deemed too long,
but that there was a more urgent employment open for the factors
required.
If one chooses to assert that every increase in the supply of capital
goods available rcwlts in a Iengthening of the period of production
and of waiting timc, one reasons in thc following way: If n are the
goods already previously produced and b the goods p;oduced in the
new processes startcd with thc aid of the increase in capital goods,
it is obvious that people had to wait longer for a and b than they had
to wait for a alone. In ordcr to producc rr and b it was not only necessary to acquire the capital goods required for the production of a,
but also those required for the production of b. If one had expended
for an increase of immediate consumption the means of sustenance
savcd to make workcrs available for the production of b, one would
have attained the satisfaction of some wants sooner.
T h e treatment of the capital problem customary with those economists who are opposed to the so-called "Austrian" view assumes that
the technique cmployed in production is unalterably determined by

Action in the Passing of Time

49 3

the given state of technological knowledgc. The "Austrian" economists, on the other hand, show that it is the supply of capital goods
available at cach momcnt that determines which of the many known
technological methods of production will be e m p l ~ y e d . ~
The correctness of thc "Austrian" point of view can easily be demonstrated
by a scrutiny of the problem of scarcity of capital.
Let us look at thc condition of a country suffering from scarcity of
capital. Take, for instance, the state of affairs in Rumania about I 860.
What was lacking was ccrtainly not technological knowledge. There
was no secrecy concerning the technological methods practiced by
the advanced nations of the West. l'hey were described in innumerable books and taught at many schools. The elite of Rumanian youth
had received full information about thcm at the technological universities of Austria, Switzerland, and France. Hundreds of foreign
experts were ready to apply their knowledge and skill in Rumania.
What was wanting was the capital goods needed for a transformation
of the backward Rumanian apparatus of production, transportation,
and communication according to Western patterns. If the aid granted
t o the Rumanians on the part of the advanced foreign nations had
consisted merely in providing them with technological knowledge,
they would have had to rcalize that it would take a very long time
until they caught up with the West. The first thing for them to have
done would haw been to savc in order to make workers and material
factors of production available for the performance of more timeconsuming proccsscs. Only then could they succcssivcly produce the
tools required for the construction of those plants which in the further course were to produce the equipment needed for the construction and operation of modcrn plants, farms, mines, railroads, telegraph
lines, and buildings. Scores of decades would have passed until they
had made up for the time lost. There would not have been any means
of accelerating this process than by restricting current consumption as far as physiologically possible for the intermediary period.
However, things devclopcd in a different way. The capitalist
West lent to the backward countries the capital ioocls needed for
an instantaneous transformation of a great part of their methods of
production. It saved them time and made it possible for them to
multiply very soon the productivity of their labor. The effect for
8. Cf. F. A. Hayek, ?'be Pure Theory of Capital (London, ~ g q r ) ,p. 48. It is
awkward indeed to attach to certain lines of thought national labels. As Hayck
remarks pertinently (p. 47, n. I ) , the classical English economists since Ricardo,
and particularly J. S. Mill (the latter probably partly under the influence of J.
Rae) were in some regards more "Austrian" than their recent Anglo-Saxon
successors.

494
Human Action
the Rumanians was that they could immediatel\; enjoy the advantages
derived from the modern technological procedures. It was as if they
had started at a much earlier date to save and to accumulate capital
goods.
Shortage of capital means that one is further away from the attainment of a goal sought than if one had started to aim at it at an
earlier date. Because one neglected to do this in the past, the intermediary products are wanting, although the nature-given factors
from which they are to be produced are availablc. Capital shortage
is dearth of time. It is the effect of the fact that one was late in
beginning the march toward the aim concerned. It is impossible to
dcscribe the advantages derived from capital goods available and
the disadvantages resulting from the paucity of capital goods without resorting to the time element of sooner and later.g
T o have capital goods at one's disposal is tantamount to being nearer
to a goal aimed at. An increment in capital goods available makes it
possible to attain temporally remoter ends without being forced to
restrict consumption. A loss in capital goods, on the other hand, makes
it necessary either to abstain from striving after certain goals which
one could aim at before or to restrict consumption. T o havc capita1
goods means, other things being equa1,'O a temporal gain. As against
those who lack capital goods, the capitalist, under the given state of
technological knowledge, is in a position to reach a definite goal
sooner without restricting consumption and without increasing the
input of labor and nature-given material factors of production. His
head start is in time. A rival endowed with a smaller supply of capital
goods can catch up only by restricting his consumption.
The start which the peoples of the West have gained over the other
peoples consists in the fact that they havc long since crcated the
political and. institutional conditions required for a smooth and by
and large uninterrupted progress of the process of larger-scalc saving,
capital accumulation, and investment. Thus, by the middle of the
nineteenth century, they had aiready attained a state of w-eii-being
which far surpassed that of poorer races and nations less successful
in substituting the ideas of acquisitive capitalism for those of predatory
militarism. Left alone and unaided by foreign capital these backward
peoples would have needed much more timc to improvc their methods of production, transportation, and communication.
It is impossible to understand the course of world affairs and the
9. Cf. W. S. Jevons, The Theory of Political Economy (4th ed. London, 1 p 4 ) ,

PP. 224-229.
10.

This implies also equality in the quantity of nature-given factors available.

Action ir2 the Passing of Time

495

development of the relations benveen West and East in the last
centuries, if one does not comprehend the importance of this largescale transfer of capital. Tbc West has given to the East not only
technological and therapeutical knowledge, but also the capital goods
needed for an immediate practical application of this knowledge.
These nations of Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa have been able,
thanks to the foreign capital imported, to reap the fruits of modern
industry at an earlier date. They were to some extent relieved from
the necessity of restricting their consumption in order to accumulate
a sufficient stock of capital goods. This was the true nature of the
alleged exploitation of the backward nations on the part of Western
capitalism about which their nationaIists and the Marxians lament.
It was a fecundation of the economically backward nations by the
wealth of the more advanced nations.
The benefits derived were mutual. What impelled the capitalists
of the West to embark upon foreign investment was the demand
of the consumers. Consumers asked for goods which could not be
produced at a11 at home and for a'cheapening of goods which could
be produced at home only with rising costs. If the consumers of the
capitalist West had behaved in a different way or if the institutional
obstacles to capital export had proved insurmountable, no capital
export would have occurred. There would have been more longitudinal expansion of domestic production instead of lateral expansion
abroad.
It is not the task of catallactics but of history to deal with the consequences of the internationalization of the capital market, its working, and its final disintegration brought about by the expropriation
policies adopted by the receiving countries. Catallactics has only to
scrutinize the effects of a richer or poorer supply of capital goods.
W e compare the conditions of two isolated market systems A and
B. Both arevequal in size and population figures, the state of technological knowledge, and in natural resources. They differ from one
another only in the supply of capita1 goods, this supply being larger
in A than in B. This enjoins that in A many processes of production
are employed with which the output is greater per unit of input than
with those employed in B. In B one cannot consider the adoption of
these processes on account of the comparative scarcity of capital
goods. Their adoption wouId require a restriction of consumption.
In B many manipulations are performed by manual labor which in
A are performed by labor-saving machines. In A goods are produced
with a longer durability; in B one must abstain from producing them
although the lengthening of durability is obtained by a less than

496

Human Action

proportionate increase in input. I n A the productivity of labor and
consequently wage rates and the standard of living of the wage
earners are higher than in B.I1

Prolongation of the Period of Provision Beyond the Expected
Duration of t l ~ eActor's Life
T h e judgments of value which determine the choice between satisfaction in nearer and in remoter periods of the future are expressive of present
valuation and not of future valuation. They weigh the significance attached today to satisfaction in the nearer future against the significance
attached today to satisfaction in the remoter future.
T h e uneasiness which acting man wants to remove as far as possible is
always present uneasiness, i.e., uneasiness felt in the very moment of action,
and it always refers to future conditions. T h e actor is discontented today
with thc expected state of affairs in various periods of the future and tries
to alter it through purposive conduct.
If action is primarily directed toward the improvement of other people's
conditions and is thcrefore col-nmonly called altruistic, the uneasiness the
actor wants to remove is his own present dissatisfaction with thc expected
state of other people's affairs in various periods of the future. In taking
care of other people he aims at alleviating his own dissatisfaction.
It is thcrefore not surprising that acting man often is intent upon prolonging the period of provision beyond the expected duration of his own
life.

Some Applications of the Time-Preference Theory
Every part of economics is open to intentional misrepresentation and
misinterpretation on the part of people eager to excuse or to justify fallacious doctrines underlying their party programs. T o prevent such misuse
as far as possible it seems expedient to add some explanatory remarks to the
exposition of the time-preference theory.
There are schools of thought which flatly deny that men differ with regard to innate characteristics inherited from their a n c c s t ~ r s . ~ V n
the
opinion of these authors the only difference between the white men of
TT,
vvestern civiiizatior~a11d Eskimos is that the h e r are in arrears in their
progress toward modern industrial civilization. This merely temporal
difference of a few thousand years is insignificant when comparcd with
the many hundreds of thousands of years which were absorbed by man's
evolution from the simian state of his apelike forebears to the conditions
of present-day homo sapiens. It does not support the assumption that racial
differences prevail between the various specimens of mankind.
1 1 . Cf. John Bates Clark, Essentials of Economic Tbeory (New York, 1907),
pp. '33 ff.
12. About thc Marxian attack against genetics, cf. T. D. Lysenko, Heredity
and Variability (New York, 1945). A critical appraisal of this controversy is provided by J. R. Baker, Science and the Planned State (hTewYork, rg45), pp. 71-76.

Action in the Passing of Time

497

Praxeology and economics are foreign to the issues raised by this controversy. But they must take precautionary measures lest they become
implicated by partisan spirit in this clash of antagonistic ideas. If those
fanatically rejecting the teachings of modern genetics were not entirely
ignorant of economics, they would certainly try to turn the time-prefercnce theory to their advantage. T h e y would refer to the circumstance
that the superiority of the Western nations consists merely in their having
started earlier in endeavors to save and to accumuIate capital goods. They
would explain this temporal difference by accidental factors, the better
opportunity offered by environment.
Against such possible misinterpretations one must emphasize the fact
that the temporal head start gained by the Western nations was conditioned
b y ideological factors which cannot be, rcduced simply t o the operation of
environment. W h a t is called human civilization has up to now been a progress from cooperation by virtue of hegemonic bonds to cooperation by
virtue of contractual bonds. But while many races and peoples were arrested at a n early stage of this movement, others kept on advancing. T h e
eminence of the Western nations consisted in the fact that they succeeded
better in checking the spirit of predatory militarism than the rest of rnankind and that they thus brought forth the social institutions required for
saving and investment on a broader scale. Even Marx did not contest the
fact that private initiative and private ownership of the means of production were indispensable stages in the progress from primitive man's penury
t o the more satisfactory conditions of nineteenth-century Western Europe
and North America. W h a t the East lndies, China, Japan, and the Mohammedan countries lacked were institutions of safeguarding the individual's
rights. T h e arbitrary administration of pashas, kadis, rajahs, mandarins, and
daimios was not conducive to large-scale accumulation of capital. T h e legal
guarantees effectively protecting the individual against expropriation and
confiscation were the foundations upon which the unprecedented economic progress of the West came into flowcr. These laws were not an outgrowth of chance, historical accidents, and geographical environment.
T h e y were the product of reason.
W e do not know what course the history of Asia and Africa would have
taken if these peoples had been left alone. W h a t happened was that some
of these peoples were subject to European rule and others-like China and
Japan-wcre forced by the display of naval power to open their frontiers.
T h e achievements of Western industrialism came to them from abroad.
T h e y w-ere ready to take advantage of the foreign capital lent to them and
invested in their territories. But they were rather slow in the reception of
the ideologies from which modern industrialism had sprung. Their assimilation to Western ways of life is superficial.
W e are in the midst of a revolutionary process which will very soon d o
away with all varieties of colonialism. This revolution is not limited t o
those countries which were subject to the ruIe of thc British. thc French
and the Dutch. Even nations which without any infringement of their

498

Human Action

political sovereignty had profited from foreign capital are intent upon
throwing off what they call the yoke of foreign capitalists. They are expropriating the foreigners by various devices-discriminatory taxation, rcpudiation of debts, undisguised confiscation, foreign exchange restrictions.
W e are on the eve of the complete distintegration of the international
capital market. The economic consequences of this event are obvious; its
political repercussions are unpredictable.
In order to appreciate the political consequences of the disintegration of
the international capital market it is necessary to remember what effects
were brought about by the internationalization of the capital market.
Under the conditions of the later nineteenth century it did not matter
whether or not a nation was prepared and equipped with the required
capital in order to utilize adequately the natural resources of its territory.
There was practically free access for everybody to every area's natural
wealth. In searching for the most advantageous opportunities for investment capitalists and promoters were not stopped by national borderlines.
As far as investment for the best possible u'tilization of the known natural
resources was concerned, the greater part of the earth's surface could be
considered as integrated into a uniform world-embracing market system.
It is true that this resuIt was attained in some areas, like the British and the
Dutch East Indies and Malaya, only by colonial regimes and that autochthonous governments of these territories would probably not have created
the institutional setting indispensable for the importation of capital. But
Eastern and Southern Europe and the Western Hemisphere had of their
own accord joined the community of the international capita1 market.
'The Marxians were intent upon indicting foreign loans and investments
for the lust for war, conquest, and colonial expansion. In fact the internationalization of the capital market, together with free trade and the freedom of migration, was instrumental in removing the economic incentives
to war and conquest. It no longer mattered for a man where the political
boundaries of his country were drawn. T h e entrepreneur and the investor
were not checked by them. Precisely those nations which in the age preceding the first World W a r were paramount in foreign lending and investment were committed to the ideas of peace-loving "decadent" liberalism.
Of the foremost aggressor nations Russia, Italy, and Japan were not capital
exporters; they themseives needed foreign capitai for the deveiopment of
their own natural resourccs. Germany's imperialist adventures were not
supported by its big business and finance.13
T h e disappearance of the international capital market alters conditions
entireIy. It abolishes the freedom of access to natural resourccs. If one of
the socialist governments of the economically backward nations lacks the
capital needed for the utilization of its natural resources, there will be no
means to remedy this situation. If this system had been adopted a hundred
years ago, it would have been impossible to exploit the oil fields of Mexico,
1 3 . Cf. ~Mises,Omnipotent Government (New Haven, 1944)- p. 99 and thc
books quoted there.

Action in the Passing of Time
Venezuela, and Iran, to establish the rubber plantations in Malaya or to
develop the banana production of Central America. It is illusoxy to assume
that the advanced nations will acquiesce in such a state of affairs. They will
resort to the only method which gives them access to badly needed raw
materials; they wiIl resort to conquest. War is the alternative to freedom of
foreign investment as realized by the international capital market.
The inflow of foreign capital did not harm the receiving nations. It was
European capital that accelerated considerably the marvelous economic
evolution of the United States and the British Dominions. Thanks to
foreign capital the countries of Latin America and Asia are today equipped
with facilities for production and transportation which they would have
had to forego for a very long time if they had not received this aid. Real
wage rates and farm yields are higher today in those areas than they would
have been in the absence of foreign capital. The mere fact that almost all
nations are vehemcntly asking today for American credits explodes the
fables of the Marxians and the nationalists.
However, the mere lust for imported capital goods does not resuscitate
the international capital market. Investment and lending abroad are only
possible if the recciving nations are unconditionally and sincerely committed to the principle of private property and do not plan t o expropriate the
foreign capitalists at a later date. It was such expropriations that destroyed
the international capital market.
Intergovernmental loans are no substitute for the functioning of an international capital market. If they are granted on business terms, they prcsuppose no less than private loans the fuIl acknowledgment of property rights.
If they are granted, as is usually the case, as virtual subsidies without any
regard for payment of principal and interest, they impose restrictions upon
the debtor nation's sovereignty. In fact such "loans" are for the most part
the price paid for military assistance in coming wars. Such military considerations already played an important role in the years in which the
European powers prepared the great wars of our age. The outstanding
example was provided by the huge sums which the French capitalists,
pressed hard by the Government of the Third Republic, lent to Imperial
Russia. The Tsars used the capita1 borrowed for armaments, not for an improvement of the Russian apparatus of production. They did not invest
it; they consumed a great part of it.

5 . The Convertibility of Capital Goods
Capital goods are intermediary steps on the way toward a definite
goal. If in the course of the period of production the goal is changed,
it is not always possible to use the intermediary products already
available f o r the pursuit of the new goal. Some of the capital goods
become absolutely useless, and all expenditure made in their production appears now as waste. Other capital goods can be utilized f o r the

500

Human Action

new project but only after having been subjected to a process of
adjustment; it would have been possible to spare the costs required
by this alteration if one had from the start aimed at the new goal.
A third group of capital goods can be employed for the new process
without any alteration; but if it had been known at the time they
were produced that they would be used in the new way, it would
have been possible to manufacture at smaller cost other goods which
could render the same service. Finally there are also capital goods
which can be employed for the new project just as well as for the
original one.
It would hardly be necessary to mention these obvious facts if it
were not essential to refute popular misconceptions. There is no
such thing as an abstract or ideal 'capital that exists apart from concrete capital goods. If we disregard the role cash-holding plays in the
composition of capital (we will deal with this problem in one of
the later sections) we must realize that capital is always embodied in
definite capital goods and is affected by everything that happens
with regard to them. The value of an amount of capital is a derivative
of the value of the capita1 goods in which it is embodied. The money
equivalent of an amount of capital is the sum of the money equivalents
of the aggregate of capital goods to which one refers in speaking of
capital in the abstract. There is nothing which could be called "free"
capital. Capital is always in the form of definite capital goods. These
capital goods are better utilizable for some purposes, less utilizable
for others, and absolutely useless for still other purposes. Every unit
of capital is therefore in some way or other fixed capital, i.e., dedicated
to definite processes of production. The businessman's distinction between fixed capital and circulating capital is a difference of degree,
not of kind. Everything that is valid with regard to fixed capital is
also valid, although to a smaller degree, with regard to circulating
capital. All capital goods have a more or less specific character. Of
course, with many of them it is rather unlikely that a change in wants
and plans will make them entirely useless.
T h e more a definite process of production approaches its ultimate
end, the closer becomes the tie between its intermediary products
and the goal aimed at. Iron is less specific in character than iron
tubes, and iron tubes less so than iron machine-parts. The conversion
of a process of production becomes as a rule the more difficult, the
farther it has been pursued and the nearer it has come to its terrnjnation, the turning out of consumers' goods.
In looking at the process of capital accumulation from its very
beginnings one can easily recognize that there cannot be such a thing

Action in the Passing of Time

501
as free capital. There is only capital embodied in goods of a more
specific character and in goods of a less specific character. When the
wants or the opinions concerning the methods of want-satisfaction
change, the vaIue of the capita1 goods is altered accordingly. Additional capita1 goods can come into existence only through making
consumption lag behind current production. The additionaI capital
is already in the very moment of its coming into existence embodied
in concrete capital goods. These goods had to be produced before
they could-as an excess of production over consumption-become
capital goods. T h e role which the intraposition of money plays in
the sequence of these events will be dealt with Iater. Here we need
only recognize that even the capitalist whose whole capital consists
in money and in claims to money does not own free capital. His funds
are tied up with money. They are affected by changes in money's
purchasing power and-as far as they are invested in claims to definite
sums of money-also by changes in the debtor's solvency.
It is expedient to substitute the notion of the convertibility of
capital goods for the misleading distinction between fixed and free
or circulating capital. T h e convertibility of capital goods is the opportunity offered to adjust their utilization to a change in the data of
production. Convertibility is graduated. It is never perfect, i.e., present
with regard to all possible changes in the data. In the case of absolutely specific factors it is entirely absent. As the conversion of capital
goods from the employment originally planned to other employments becomes necessary through the emergence of unforeseen
changes in the data, it is impossible to speak of convertibility in general
without reference to changes in the data which have already occurred
or are expected. A radical change in the data could make capital goods
previously considered to be easily convertible either not convertible
at all or convertible only with difficulty.
It is obvious that in practice the problem of convertibility plays
a greater role with goods the serviceability of which consists in rendering a series of services over a period of time than with capital goods
the serviceability of which is exhausted by rendering only one service in the process of production. The unused capacity of plants and
transportation facilities and the scrapping of equipment which according to the plans underlying its production was designed for longer
use are more momentous than the throwing away of fabrics and
clothing out of fashion and of physically perishabIe goods. The
problem of convertibility is peculiarly a problem of capital and
capital goods only in so far as capital accounting makes it especially
visible with regard to capital goods. Essentially it is a phenomenon

502
Human Action
present also in the case of consumers' goods which an individual
has acquircd for his own use and consumption. If the conditions
which resulted in their acquisition change, the problem of convertibility becomes actual with them too.
Capitalists and entrepreneurs in their capacity as owners of capital
arc never perfectly frec; they are ncvcr on the eve of the first decision
and action which will bind them. They are always already engaged
in some way or other. Their funds are not outside the social process
of production, but invested in definite lines. If they own cash, this
is, according to the state of the market, either a sound or an unsound
"investment"; but it is always an investment. They have either let
slip the right moment for the'purchase of concrete factors of production which they must buy sooner or later, or the right moment to
buy has not yet come. In the first case their holding of cash is unsound; they have missed an opportunity. In the second case their
choice was correct.
Capitalists and entrepreneurs in expending moncy for the purchase
of concretc factors of production value the goods exclusively from
the point of view of the anticipated future state of the market. They
pay prices adjusted to future conditions as they thcmsclves appraise
them today. Errors committed in the past in thc production of capital
goods available today do not burden the buyer; their incidence falls
entirely on the seller. In this sense the entrepreneur who proceeds
to buy against money capital goods for future production crosses
out the past. His entrcprcneurial vcntures are not affected by changes
which in the past occurred in the valuation and the prices of the
factors of production he acquires. In this sense alone one may say
that the owner of ready cash owns liquid funds and is free.

6. T h e Influence of the Past Upon Action
The more the accumulation of capital goods proceeds, the greater
becomes the problem of convertibility. The primitive methods of
farmers and handicraftsmen of earlier ages could more easily be adjusted to new tasks than modern capitalist methods. But it is precisely modern capitalism that is faced with rapid changes in conditions. Changes in technological knowledge and in the demand of
consumers as they occur daiIy in our time make obsoIete many of
the plans directing the course of production and raise the question
whether or not one should pursue the path started on.
T h e spirit of sweeping innovation may get hold of men, may
triumph over the inhibitions of sluggishness and indoIence, may incite

Action in the Passing of Time

503
the slothful slaves of routine to a radical rescission of traditional
valuations, and may peremptorily urge people to enter upon new
paths leading to new goals. Doctrinaires may try to forget that we are
in all our endeavors the heirs of our fathers, and that our civilization,
the product of a long evolution, cannot be transformed at one stroke.
But however strong the propensity for innovation may be, it is kept
in bounds by a factor that forces men not to deviate too hastily from
the course chosen by their forebears. All material wealth is a residuum
of past activities and is embodied in concrete capital goods of limited
convertibility. T h e capital goods accumulated direct the actions of
the living into lines which they would not have chosen if their discretion had not been restricted by binding action accomplished in
the past. T h e choice of ends and of the means for the attainment of
those ends is influenced by the past. Capital goods are a conservative
element. They force us to adjust our actions to conditions brought
about by our own conduct in earlier days and by the thinking, choosing and acting of bygone generations.
W e may picture to ourselves the image of how things would be if,
equipped with our present knowledge of natural resources, geography, technology, and hygienics, we had arranged all processes of
production and manufactured all capital goods accordingly. W e
would have located the centers of production in other places. W e
would have populated the earth's surface in a different way. Some
areas which are today denseIy inhabited and full of plants and farms
would be less occupied. W e would have assembled more people and
morc shops and farms in other areas. All establishments would be
equipped with the most efficient machines and tools. Each of them
would be of the size required for the most economical utilization of its
capacity of production. In the world of our perfect planning there
would be no technological backwardness, no unused capacity to produce, and no avoidable shipping of men or of goods. The productivity
of human exertion would far surpass that prevailing in our actual,
imperfect state.
T h e writings of the socialists are full of such utopian fancies.
Whether they call themselves Marxian or non-Marxian socialists,
technocrats, or simply planners, they are all eager to show us how
foolishly things are arranged in rcality and how happily men could
live if they were to invest the reformers with dictatorial powers. It
is only the inadequacy of the capitalist mode of production that prevents mankind from enjoying all the amenities which could be produced under the contemporary state of technological knowledge.
The fundamental error involved in this rationalistic romanticism

5%
Human Action
is the misconception of the character of the capital goods available
and of their scarcity. The intermediary products available today
were manufactured in the past by our ancestors and by ourselves. ~ c e
plans which guided their production were an outgrowth of the then
prcvailing ideas concerning cnds and technological procedures. If
w-e consider aiming at different ends and choosing different methods
of production, we are faced with an alternative. W e must either
leave unused a great part of the capital goods available and start afresh
producing modern equipment, or we must adjust our production
processes as far as possible to the specific character of the capital goods
available. The choice rests, as it always does in the market economy,
with the consumers. Their conduct in buying or not buying settles
the issue. In choosing between old tenements and new ones equipped
with all the gadgets of comfort, between railroad and motorcar, between gas and electric light, between cotton and rayon goods, between silk and nylon hosiery, they implicitly choose between a continued employment of previously accumulated capital goods and
their scrapping. When an old building which could still be inhabited
for years is not prematurely demolished and replaced by a modern
house because the tenants are not preparcd to pay high& rents and
prefer to satisfy other wants instcad of living in more comfortabIe
homes, it is obvious how prescnt consumption is influcnced by conditions of the past.
The fact that not every technological improvement is instantly
applied in the whole field is not more conspicuous than the fact that
not everybody throws away his old car or his old clothes as soon as
a better car is on the marlrct or new patterns become fashionable. In
all such things people are motivatcd by the scarcity of goods available.
A new machine, more efficient than those used previously, is
constructed. Whether or not the plants equipped with the old, less
efficient machincs will discard them in spite of the fact that they are
still utilizable and replace them by the new nlodcl depends on the
degree of the new machine's superiority. Only if this superioriw
is great enough to compensate for the additional expenditure required,
is the scrapping of the old equipment economically sound. Let p be
the price of the new machine, q the price that can be realized by
selling the old machine as scrap iron, a the cost of producing one
unit of product by the old machine, b the cost of producing one unit
of product by the new machine without taking into account the
costs required for its purchase. Let us further assume that the eminence of the new machine consists rnercly in a better utilization of
raw material and labor employed and not in manufacturing a greater

Action in the Passing of Time

505
quantity of products and that thus the annual output z remains unchanged. Then the replacement of the old machine by the new one is
advantagzous if the yield z (a - b) is large enough to make good for
the expenditure of p - q. We may disregard the writing off of depreciation in assuming that the annual quotas arc not greater for the
new machine than for the old one. The same considerations hold true
also for the transfer of an already existing plant from a place in which
conditions of production are less favorable to a location offering
more favorable conditions.
Technological backwardness and economic inferiority are two different things and must not be confused. It can happen that a production aggregate w-hich from a merely technological point of view
appears outclassed is in a position to compete successfully with
aggregates better equipped or located at more favorable sites. The
degree of the superiority provided by the technologically more
efficient equipment or by the more propitious location as compared
with the surplus expenditure required for the transformation decides
the issue. This relation depends on the convertibility of the capital
goods concerned.
The distinction between technological perfection and economic
expediency is not, as romantic engineers would have us believe, a
feature of capitalism. It is true that only economic calculation as
possible solely in a market economy gives the opportunity to establish
all th: computations required for the cognition of the relevant facts.
A socialist nlanagement .would not be in a position to ascertain the
state of affairs by arithmetical methods. It would therefore not know
xvhetlier or not what it plans and puts into operation is the most appropriate procedure to employ the means available for the satisfaction
of what it considers to be the k o s t urgent of the still unsatisfied wants
of the people. But if it were in a position to calculate, it would not
proceed in a way difFerent from that of the calculating businessman.
It would not squander scarce factors of production for the satisfaction
of wants deemed iess urgent if this wouid prevent the satisfaction of
morc urgent wants. It would not hurry to scrap still utilizable production facilities if thc investment required would impair the expansion
of thc production of more urgently needed goods.
If one takrs the problem of convertibility into proper account,
on: cnn easilv explode manv widespread fallacies. Take, for instance,
th; infnnt industries argument advanced in favor of protection. Its
s ~ l n p o r t massert that temporary protection is needed in order to
develop proccssing industries in places in which natural conditions
for their operation are more favorable or, at least, no less favorable

506
Human Action
than in the areas in which the older established competitors are located.
These older industries have acquired an advantage by their early
start. They are now fostered by a merely historical, accidental, and
manifestly "irrational" factor. This advantage prevents the establishment of competing plants in areas the conditions of which give
promise of becoming able to produce more cheaply than, or at
least as cheaply as, the old ones. It may be admitted that protection
for infant industries is temporarily expensive. But the sacrifices made
will be more than repaid by the gains to be reaped later.
T h e truth is that the establishment of an infant industry is advantageous from the economic point of view only if the superiority
of the new location is so momentous that it outweighs the disadvantages resulting from the abandonment of nonconvertible and nontransferable capital goods invested in the older established plants. If
this is the case, the new plants will be able to compete successfully
with the old ones without any aid given by the government. If it
is not the case, the protection granted to thcm is wasteful, even if
it is only temporary and enables the new industry to hold its own at a
later period. T h e tariff amounts virtually to a subsidy which the consumers are forced to pay as a compensation for the employment of
scarce factors of production for the replacement of still utilizable
capital goods to be scrapped and the withholding of these scarce
factors from other employments in which they could render services
valued higher by the consumers. The consumers are deprived of the
opportunity to satisfy certain wants because the capital goods required are directed toward the production of goods which were already available for them in the absence of tariffs.
There prevails a universal tendency for all industries to move to
those locations in which the potentialities for production are most
propitious. In the unhampered market economy this tendencv is
slowed down as much as due consideration to the inconvertibkty
of scarce capital goods requires. This historical element does not
give a permanent superiority to the old industries. It only prevents
the waste originating from investments which bring about unused
capacity of still utilizable production facilities on the one hand and
a restriction of capital goods available for the satisfaction of unsatisfied wants on the other hand. In the absence of tariffs the migration of industries is postponed until the capita1 goods investcd in the
old plants are worn out or become obsolete by technological improvements which are so momentous as to necessitate their replacement by new equipment. The industrial history of the United States
povidls numerous examples of the shifting, within the boundaries

Action in the Passing of Time

507
of the country, of centers of industrial production which was not
fostered by any protective measures on the part of the authorities.
The infant industries argument is no less spurious than all the other
arguments advanced in favor of protection.
Another popuIar fallacy refers to the alleged suppression of useful
patents. A patent is a legal monopoly granted for a limited number
of years to the inventor of a new contrivance. At this point we are
not concerned with the question whether or not it is a good policy t o
grant such exclusive privileges to inventors.14 W e have to deal only
with the assertion that "big business" misuses the patent system to
withhold from the public benefits it could derive from technological
improvement.
In granting a patent to an inventor the authorities do not investigate
the invention's economic significance. They are concerned merely
with the priority of the idea and limit their examination to technological problems. They deal with the same impartial scrupulousness with
an invention which revolutionizes a whole industry and with some
trifling gadget, the uselessness of which is obvious. Thus patent protection is provided to a vast number of quite worthless inventions.
Their authors are ready to overrate the importance of their contribution to the progress of technological knowledge and build exaggerated hopes upon the material gain it could bring them. Disappointed, they grumble about the absurdity of an economic system that deprives the people of the benefi; of technological progress.
The conditions under which it is economical to substitute new
i~nprovedequipment for still utilizable older tools have been pointed
out above. If these conditions are absent, it does not pay, either for
private enterprise in a market economy or for the socialist management of a totalitarian system, to adopt the new technological process
immediately. The new machinery to be produced for new plants,
the expansion of already existing plants and the replacement of old
equipment torn out will be effected according to the new design.
But the still utilizable equipment will not be scrapped. The new process will bc adopted only step by step. The plants equipped with the
old devices are for some time still in a position to stand the competition of those equippcd with the new ones. Those questioning the
correctness of this statement should ask themselves whether they
always throw away their vacuum cleaners or radio sets as soon as
better models are offered for sale. '
It does not make any difference in this regard whether the new
14. Cf. above, pp. 382-383, and below, pp. 676677.

508
Human Action
invention is or is not protected by a patent. A firm that has acquired
a license has already expended money for the new invention. If it
nonetheless does not adopt the new method, the reason is that its
adoption does not pay. It is of no avail that the government-created
nlonopoly which the patent provides prevents competitors from
applying it. What counts alone is the degree of superiority secured
by the new invention as against old methods. Superiority means reduction in the cost of production per unit or such an improvement
in the quality of the product that buyers are ready to pay adequately
higher prices. The absence of a sufficient degree of superioritv to
make the cost of transformation profitable is proof of the fact-that
consumers are more intent upon acquiring other goods than upon enjoying the benefits of the new invention. It is the consumers with
whom the ultimate decision rests.
Superficial observers sometimes fail to see these facts because they
are deluded by the practice of many big enterprises of acquiring the
rights granted by a patent in their field regardIess of its usefulness.
This practice stems from various considerations:
I. The economic significance of the innovation is not yet recognizable.
z. The innovation is obviously useless. But the firm beIieves that it
could develop it in such a way as to make it useful.
3. The immediate application of the innovation does not pay. But
the firm intends to apply it later when replacing its worn-out equipment.
4. The firm wants to encourage the inventor to continue his research in spite of the fact that up to now his endeavors have not resulted in a practically utilizable innovation.
j. The firm wants to placate litigious inventors in order to spare
the money, time, and nervous strain which frivolous infringement
suits bring about.
6. The firm resorts to hardly disguised bribery or yields to veiled
o~ackmaiiwhen paying for quite usciess patents to oficers, engineers,
or other influential personnel of firnis or institutions which are its
customers or potential customers.
If an invention is so superior to the old processes that it makes the
old equipment obsolete and peremptorily demands its immediate replacement by new machines, the transformation will be effected no
matter whether the privilege conferred by the patcnt is in the hands
of the owners of the old equipmeht or of an independent firm. The
assertions to the contrary are based on the assumption that not only
the inventor and his attorneys but aIso all people already active in
3

.

Action in the Passing of Time

509
the field of production concerned or prepared to enter into it if an
opportunity is offered to them fail entirely to grasp the importance
of the invention. The inventor sells his rights to the old firm for a
trifle because no one else wants to acquire them. And this old firm is
also too dull to see the advantages that it could derive from the application of the invention.
Now, it is true that a technological improvement cannot be
adopted if people are blind to its usefulness. Under a socialist management the incompetence or stubborness of the officers in charge of
the department concerned would be enough to prevent the adoption
of a more economical method of production. The same is the case
with regard to inventions in fields dominated by the government.
T h e most conspicuous examples are provided by the failure of
eminent military experts to comprehend the significance of new
devices. T h e great Napoleon did not recognize the help which steamboats could give to his plans to invade Great Britain; both Foch and
the German general staff underestimated on the eve of the first World
War the importance of aviation, and later the eminent pioneer of air
power, General Billy Mitchell, had very unpleasant experiences. But
things are entirely different in the orbit in which the market economy
is not hampered by bureaucratic narrow-mindedness. There a tendency to overrate rather than to underestimate the potentialities of
an innovation prevails. The history of modern capitalism shows innumerable instances of abortive attempts to push innovations which
proved futile. Many promoters have paid heavily for unfounded
optimism. It would be more realistic to blame capitalism for its
propensity to over-value useless innovations than for its alleged suppression of useful innovations. It is a fact that large sums have been
wasted for the purchase of quite useless patent rights and for fruitless
ventures to apply them in practice.
I t is absurd to speak of an alleged bias of modern big business
against technological improvement. T h e great corporations spend
hrirrp PIT-S
the sCzr& for ~ e w
processes afid fie.,t. devices.
---aThose lamenting an alleged suppression of inventions on the part
of free enterprise must not think that they have proved their case
by referring to the fact that many patents are either never utilized
at all or only used after a long delay. I t is manifest that numerous
patents, perhaps the far greater number of them, are quite useless.
Those alleging suppression of useful innovations do not cite a single
instance of such an innovation's being unused in the countries protecting it by a patent while it is used by the Soviets-no respecters of
patent privileges.

---

51°
H m a n Action
T h e limited convertibility of capital goods plays an important
role in human geography. The present distribution of human abodes
and industrial centers over the earth's surface is to a certain degree
determined by historical factors. The fact that definite sites were
chosen in a distant past is still operative. There prevails, it is true, a
universal tendency for people to move to those areas which offer the
most propitious potentialities for production. However, this tendency
is restrained not only by institutional factors, such as migration
barriers. A historical factor also plays a momentous role. Capital goods
of limited convertibility have been invested in areas which, from the
point of view of our present knowledge, offer less favorable opportunities. Their immobilization counteracts the tendency to locate
plants, farms, and dwelling places according to the state of our
contemporary information about geography, geology, plant and
animal physiology, climatology, and other branches of science.
Against the advantages of moving toward sites offering better physical
opportunities one must weigh the disadvantages of leaving unused
capital goods of limited convertibility and transferability.
Thus the degree of convertibility of the supply of cipital goods
available affects all decisions concerning production and consumption.
The smaller the degree of convertibility, the more realization of
technological improvement is delayed. Yet it would be absurd to
refer to this retarding effect as irrational and antiprogressive. T o
consider, in planning action, all the advantages and disadvantages
expected and to weigh them against one another is a manifestation of
rationality. Not the soberly calculating businessman, but the romantic
technocrat is to blame for a delusive incomprehension of reality.
What sloxvs down technological improvemenr is not the imperfect
convertibility of capital goods, but their scarcity. W e arc not rich
enough to renounce the services which still utilizable capital goods
could provide. The fact that a supply of capital goods is available
does not check progress; it is, on the contrary, the indispensable
condition of any improvement and progress. The heritage of the past
embodied in our suppIy of capital goods is our wealth and the foremost means of further advancement in well-being. It is true, we
would be stilI better off if our ancestors and we ourselves in our
past actions had succeeded in better anticipating the conditions under
which we must act today. The cognizance of this fact explains many
phenomena of our time. But it does not cast any blame upon the
past nor does it show any imperfection inherent in the market economy.

Action in the Passing of Time
7. Accumulation, Maintenance and Consumption
of Capital
Capita1 goods are intcrmediary products which in the further
course of production activities are transforrncd into consumers'
goods. All capital goods, including those not called perishable, perish
cither in wearing out their serviceablencss in the performance of
production proccsses or in losing their serviceablencss, evcn before
this happens, through a change in the market data. There is no
question of keeping a stock of capital goods intact. They are transient.
The notion of wealth constancy is an outgrowth of deliberate
planning and acting. It refers to the concept of capital as applied in
capital accounting, not to the capital goods as such. The idca of
capital has no counterpart in the physical universe of tangible things.
It is nowhcre but in the minds of planning mcn. It is an element in
economic calculation. Capita1 accounting serves one purpose only.
It is dcsigncd to make us know how our arrangement of production
and consumption acts upon our power to satisfy future wants. The
question it answers is whether a certain course of conduct increases
or dccreases thc productivity of our future exertion.
The intention of preserving the avaiIable supply of capital goods
in full power or of increasing it could also direct the actions of men
who did not have the mental too1 of economic calculation. Primitive
fishcrmen and hunters were certainly aware of the difference between
maintaining their tools and devices in good shape and serviceableness
and wearing them out without providing for adequate replacements.
An old-fashioned peasant, committed to traditional routine and
ignorant of accountancy, knows very we11 the significance of maintaining intact his live and dead stock. Under the simple conditions
of a stationary or slowly progrcssing cconorny it is feasible to operate
successfully evcn in the abscnce of capital accounting. There the
supply of capital goods
maintcnance of a by and large u~~changed
can be effccted either by currcnt production of pieces destined
to replace those worn out or by the accumuIation of a fund of consumcrs' goods which makes it possible to devote effort at a latcr time
toward the replacement of such capital goods without bcing forced
to restrict consumption temporarily. But a changing industrial economy cannot do without economic calculation and its fundamental
concepts of capita1 and income.
Conceptual realism has muddied the comprehension of the con-

512

Human Action

cept of capital. It has brought about a mythology of capital.15 An
existence has been attributed to "capital," independent of the capital
goods in which it is embodied. Capital, it is said, reproduces itself and
thus provides for its own maintenance. Capital, says the Marxian,
hatches out profit. All this is nonsense.
Capital is a praxeological concept. If we were to resort to the
terminology of traditional philosophy, which is characterized by
neglect of all praxeological issues, we could call it a voIuntaristic
concept. It is a product of reasoning, and its placc is in the human
mind. It is a mode of looking at the problems of acting, a method of
appraising them from the point of view of a definite plan. It dctermines the course of human action and is, in this scnsc only, a real
factor. It is inescapably linked with capitalism, the market economy.
It is a mere shadow in economic systems in which there is no market
exchange and no money prices of goods of all orders.
The capital concept is operative as far as men in their actions let
themselves be guided by capital accounting. If the entrepreneur has
employed factors of production in such a way that the money equivalent of the products at least equals the money equivalent of the
factors expended, he is in a position to replace the capital goods expended by new capital goods the money equivalent of which equals
the money equivalent of those expended. But the employment of the
gross proceeds, their allotment to the maintenance of capital, consumption, and the accumulation of new capital is always the outcome
of purposive action on the part of the entrepreneurs and capitalists.
It is not "automatic"; it is by necessity the result of deliberate action.
And it can be frustrated if the computation on which it is based was
vitiated by negligence, error, or misjudgment of future conditions.
Additional capital can be accumulated only by saving, i.e.. a surplus
of production over consumption. Saving may consist in a restriction
of consumption. But it can also be brought about, without a further
restriction in consumption and without a change in the input of capita1
2- L-- -- :------- :- --.. ---A..-&:-c.-,.
L ----"EUUU5,
UY 'dl1 IIILlCilSC Ill I I C L ~ J l t J U U L L I U I I . L > U L I I dl1 I l l L l C d 3 C L d l l d
PPdl
in different ways:
I . hTatural conditions have become more propitious. Harvests are
more plentiful. People have access to more fertile soil and have discovered mines yielding higher returns per unit of input. Cataclysms
and catastrophes which in repeated occurrence frustrated human
effort have become less frequent. Epidemics and cattle plagucs have
subsided.
'5. Cf. Hayek, "The Mythology of Capital," T h e Quarterly Joqmnl of
Economics, L (1936), 2 2 3 ff.

Action in t h e Passing of Time
z. People have succeeded in rendering some production processes
more fruitful without investing more capital goods and without a
further lengthening of the period of production.
3. institutional disturbances of production activitics have become
lcss frccpent. The losses caused by war, rcvolutions, strikes, sabotage,
and other crimes have been reduced.
If the surpluses thus brought about arc employed as additional
investment, they further increase future net proceeds. Then it becomes possible to expand consumption without prejudice to the supply of capital goods available and the productivity of labor.
Capital is always accumulated by individuals or groups of individuals acting in concert, nevcr by the Volkswirtschaft or the society.'"
It may happen that while some actors are accumulating additional
capital, others are at the same time consuming capital previously
accumulated. If these two processes are equal in amount, the sum
of the capital funds avajlabIe in the market system remains unaltered
and it is as if no change in the total amount of capital goods available
had occurred. The accumulation of additional capital on the part of
some people merely removes the necessity of shortening the period
of production of some processcs. But no further adoption of processes
with a longer period of production becomes feasible. If we look at
affairs from this angle wc may say that: a transfer of capital took place.
But one must guard oneself against confusing this notion of capital
transfer with the conveyance of property from one individual or
group of individuals to others.
The sale and purchase of capital goods and the loans granted to
business are not as such capita1 transfer. They are transactions which
are instrumental in conveying the concretc capital goods into the
hands of those entrepreneurs who want to employ them for the
performance of definite projects. They are only ancillary steps in
the course of a long-range sequence of acts. l h e i r composite effect
decides the success or failure of the whole project. But neither profit
nor loss directly brings about either capita1 accumulation or capital
consumption. I t is the way in which those in whose fortune profit
or loss occurs arrange their consumption that alters the amount of
capital available.
Capital transfer can be effected both without and with a conveyance in the owncrship of capital goods. The formcr is the casc when
one man consumes capital while another man independentlv accumulates capital in the same amount. The latter is the case if the
16.The state and the municipaliries, in the market economy, are also merely
actors representing concerted action on the part of definite groups of individuals.

5'4
Human Action
seller of capital goods consumes the proceeds while the buyer pays
the price out of a nonconsumed-saved-surplus
of net proceeds
over consumption.
Capital consumption and the physical extinction of capital goods
are two different things. A11 capital goods sooner or later enter into
final products and cease to exist through use, consumption, wear
and tear. What can be preserved by an appropriate arrangement of
consumption is only the value of a capital fund, never the concrete
capital goods. It may sometimes happen that acts of God or manmade destruction result in so great an extinction of capital goods that
no possible restriction of consumption can bring about in a short time
a replenishment of the capital funds to its previous level. But what
brings about such a depletion is always the fact that the net proceeds
of current production devoted to the maintenance of capital are not
sufficiently large.

8. T h e Mobility of the Investor
The limited convertibility of the capital goods does not immovably
bind their owner. The investor is free to alter the investment of his
funds. If he is able to anticipate the future state of the market more
correctly than other people, he can succeed in choosing only investments whose price will rise and in avoiding investments whose price
will drop.
Entrepreneurial profit and loss emanate from the dedication of
factors of production to definite projects. Stock exchange speculation and analogous transactions outside the securities market determine on whom the incidence of these profits and losses shall fall.
A tendency prevails to make a sharp distinction between such purely
speculative ventures and genuinely sound investment. The distinction is one of degree only. There is no such thing as a nonspeculative
investment. In a changing economy action always involves speculation. Investments may be good or bad, but they are always speculative.
A radical change in conditions may render bad even investments
commonly considered perfectly safe.
Stock speculation cannot undo past action and cannot change anything with regard to the limited convertibility of capital goods already in existence. What it can do is prevent additional investment in
branches and enterprises in yhich, according to the opinion of the
speculators, it would be misplaced. It points the specific way for
a tendency, prevailing in the market economy, to expand profitable
production ventures and to restrict the unprofitable. In this sense the
stock exchange becomes simply "the market," the focal point of the

Action in the Passing of Time

515

market economy, the ultimate device to make the anticipated demand of the consumers supreme in the conduct of business.
The mobility of the investor manifests itself in the phenomenon
called capital flight. Individual investors can go away from investments which they consider unsafe provided that they are ready to
take the loss already discounted by the market. Thus they can protect themselves against anticipated further losses and shift them to
people who are less realistic in their appraisal of the future prices of
the goods concerned. Capital flight does not withdraw inconvertible
capital goods from the lines of their investment. It consists merely
in a change of ownership.
It makes no difference in this regard whether the capitalist "flees"
into another domestic investment or into a foreign investment. One
of the main objectives of foreign exchange control is to prevent
capital flight into foreign countries. However, foreign exchange
control only succeeds in preventing the owners of domestic investments from restricting their losses by exchanging in time a
domestic investment they consider unsafe for a foreign investment
they consider safer.
If all or certain classes of domestic investment are threatened by
partial or total expropriation, the market discounts the unfavorable
consequences of this policy b y an adequate change in their prices.
When this happens, it is too late to resort to flight in order to avoid
being victimized. Only those investors can come off with a small
loss who are keen enough to forecast the disaster at a time when the
majority is still unaware of its approach and its significance. Whatever the various capitalists and entrepreneurs may do, they can never
make mobile and transferable inconvertible capital goods. While this,
at least, is admitted by and large with regard to fixed capital, it is
denied with regard to circulating capital. It is asserted that a businessman can export products and fail to reimport the proceeds. People
do not see that an enterprise cannot continue its operations when deprived of its circulating capital. If a businessman exports his own
funds employed for the current purchase of raw materials, labor,
and other essential requirements, he must replace them by funds
borrowed. The grain of truth in the fable of the mobility of circulating capital is the fact that it is possible for an investor to avoid
losses menacing his circulating capital independently of the avoidance
of such losses menacing his fixed capital. However, the process of
capital flight is in both instances the same. It is a change in the person
of the investor. The investment itself is not affected; the capital
concerned does not emigrate.

516
Human Action
Capital flight into a foreign country presupposes the propensity
of foreigners to exchange their investments abroad against those in
the country from which capital flees. A British capitalist cannot flee
from his British investments if no foreigner buys them. It foilows that
capital flight can never result in the much talked about deterioration
of the balance of payments. Seither can it tnake foreign exchange
rates rise. If many capitalists-whether British or foreign-want to
get rid of British securities, a drop in their prices will ensue. But it
u41 not affect the exchange ratio between the sterling and foreign
currencies.
T h e same is valid with regard to capital invested in ready cash.
The owner of French francs who anticipates the consequences of
the French Government's inflationary policy can either flee into
"real goods" by the purchase of goods or into foreign exchange.
But he must find people \vho are ready to take francs in exchange.
H e can flee only as long as there are still people left who appraise
the future of the franc more optimistically than hc himself does.
W h a t makes commodity prices and foreign exchange rates rise is
not the conduct of those ready to give away francs, but the conduct
of those refusing to take them except at a low rate of exchange.
Governments pretend that in resorting to foreign exchange restrictions to prevent capital flight they are motivated by consideration of the nation's vital interests. What they really bring about is
contrary to the materiai interests of many citizens without any
benefit to any citizen or to the phantom of the Volkswirtschaft. If
there is inflation going on in France, it is certainly not to the advantage either of the nation as a whole or of any citizen that all the
disastrous consequences should affect Frenchmen only. If some
Frenchmen were to unload the burden of these losses on foreigners
hy selling them French banknotes or bonds redeemable in such
banknotes, a part of these losses would fall upon foreigners. The
manifest outcome of the prevention of such transactions is to make
some Frenchmen poorer without malting any Frenchmen richer.
From the nationalist point of view this hardly seems desirable.
PopuIar opinion finds something objectionable in every possible
aspect of stock market transactions. If prices are rising, the speculators are denounced as profiteers who appropriate to themsclves what
by rights belongs to other people. If prices drop, the spxulators are
denounced for squandering the nation's wealth. T h e profi:s of the
speculators are vilified as robbery and thzft at the expense of the
rest of the nation. It is insinuated that they are the cause of the
public's poverty. I t is customary to draw a distinction between

Action in the Passing of Time
this dishonest bounty of the jobbers and the profits of the manufacturer who does not merely gamble but supplies the consumers.
Even financial writers fail to realize that stock exchange transactions
produce neither profits nor losses, but are only the consummation
of profits and losses arising in trading and manufacturing. These
profits and losses, the outgrowth of the buying public's approval or
disapproval of the investments effected in the past, are made visible
by the stock market. The turnover on the stock market does not
affect the public. It is, on the contrary, the public's reaction to the
mode in which investors arranged production activities that det.ermines the price structure of the securities market. It is ultimately the
consumers' attitude that makes some stocks rise, others drop. Those
not saving and investing neither profit nor lose on account of fluctuations in stock exchange quotations. The trade on the securities market merely decides which investors shaIl earn profits and which shall
suffer losses.1T

9. Money and Capital; Saving and Investment
Capital is computed in terms of money and represents in such accounting a definite sum of money. But capital can also consist of
amounts of money. As capital goods also are exchanged and as such
exchanges are effected under the same conditions as the exchange of
all other goods, here too indirect exchange and the use of money
become peremptory. In the market economy no participant can
forego the advantages which cash-holding conveys. Not only in
their capacity as consumers, but also in their capacity as capitalists
and entrepreneurs, individuals are under the necessity of keeping
cash holdings.
Those who have seen in this fact something puzzling and contradictory have been misled by a misconstruction of monetary calculation and capital accounting. They attempt to assign to capital accounting tasks which it can never achieve. Capital accounting is a mental
tool of calculating and computing suitable for individuals and groups
of individuals acting in the market economy. Only in the frame of
monetary calculation can capital become computable. T h e sole task
that capital accounting can perform is to show to the various individuals acting within a market economy whether the money equivalent of their funds devoted to acquisitive action has changed and to
what extent. For all other purposes capital accounting is quite useless.
17. T h e popular doctrine that the stock exchange "absorbs" capital and money
is critically analyzed and entirely refuted by F. Machlup, The Stock Marker,
Credit and Capital Formation, trans. by V . Smith (London, 1940)~pp. 6-1jj.

518

Hunzan Action

If one tries to ascertain a magnitude called the volks.'~i~tschaftliche
capital or the social capital as distinct both from the acquisitive capital
of various individuals and from the meaningless concept of the sum
of the various individual's acquisitive capital funds, then, of course,
one is troubled by a spurious problem. What is the role of money,
one asks, in such a concept of social capital? One discovers a momentous difference between capita1 as seen from the individual's point of
view and as seen from the standpoint of society. However, this
whole reasoning is utterly fallacious. It is obviously contradictory to
eliminate reference to money from the computation of a magnitude
which cannot be computed otherwise than in terms of money. It is
nonsensical to resort to monetary calculation in an attempt to ascertain
a magnitude which is meaningIess in an economic system in which
there cannot be any money and no money prices for factors of
production. As soon as our reasoning passes beyond the frame of a
market society, it must renounce every reference to money and
money prices. The concept of social capital can only be thought of
as a collection of various goods. It is impossible to compare nvo
colIections of this type otherwise than by declaring that one of them
is more serviceable in removing the uneasiness felt by the whole of
society than the other. (Whether or not such a comprehensive judgment can be pronounced by any mortal man is another question,)
No monetary expression can be applied to such collections. Monetary terms are void of any meaning in dealing with the capital problems of a social system in which there is no market for factors of
production.
In recent years economists have paid special attention to the role
cash holding plays in the process of saving and capital accumulation.
Many fallacious conclusions have been advanced about this role.
If an individual employs a sum of money not for consumption but
for the purchase of factors of production, saving is directly turned
into capital accumulation. If the individual saver employs his additionai savings for increasing his cash holding because this is in his
eyes the most advantageous mode of using them, he brings about a
tendency toward a fall in commodity prices and a rise in the monetary unit's purchasing power. If we assume that the supply of money
in the market system does not change, this conduct on the part of the
saver will not directly influence the accumulation of capital and its
employment for an expansion of production.18 The effect of our
18. Indirectly capital accumulation is affected by the changes in wealth and incomes which every instance of cash-induced change in the purchasing power of
money brings about.

Action in the Passing of Time

519

saver's saving, i.e., the surplus of goods produced over goods consumed, does not disappear on account of his hoarding. The prices
of capital goods do not rise to the height they would have attained
in the absence of such hoarding. But the fact that more capital goods
are available is not affected by the striving of a number of people
to increase their cash holdings. If nobody employs the goods-the
nonconsumption of which brought about thc additional saving-for
an expansion of his consumptive spending, they remain as an increment in the amount of capital goods available, whatever their prices
may be. The two processes-increased cash holding and increased
capital accumulation-take place side by side.
A drop in commodity prices, other things being equal, causes
a drop in the money equivalent of the various individuals' capital.
But this is not tantamount to a reduction in the supply of capital goods
and does not require an adjustment of prod~~ction
activities to an
alleged impoverishment. It merely alters the moncy items to be applied in monetary calculation.
Now let us assume that an increase in thc quantity of credit money
or of fiat money or credit expansion produces the additional money
required for an expansion of the individuals' cash holdings. Then
three processes takc their course indcpendently: a tendency toward
a fall in commodity prices brought about by the increase in the
amount of capital goods available and the resulting expansion of
production activities, a tendency toward a fall in prices brought about
by an increased demand of money for cash holding, and finally a
tendency toward a rise in prices brought about by the increase in
the supply of money (in the broader sense). The three processes
are to some extent synchronous. Each of them brings about its
particular effects which, according to the circumstances, may be
intensified or weakened by the opposite effects originating from
one of the other two. But the main thing is that the capital goods
resulting from the additional saving are not destroyed by the coincident monctary changes-changes in the demand for and the supply
of money (in the broader sense). Whenever an individual devotes
a sum of money to saving instead of spending it for consumption, the
proccss of saving agrees perfectly with the process of capital accumulation and investment. I t does not matter whether the individual
saver does or does not increase his cash hoIding. T h e act of saving
always has its counterpart in a supply of goods produced and not
consumed, of goods available for further production activities. A
man's savings are always embodied in concrete capital goods.
T h e idea that hoarded money is a barren part of the total amount

520
Human Action
of wealth the increase of which causes shrinkage in that part of
wealth that is devoted to production is correct only to the extent that
the rise in the monetary unit's purchasing power results in the employment of additional factors of production for the mining of gold
and in the transfer of gold from industrial to monetary employment.
But this is brought about by the striving after increased cash holdings
and not by saving. Saving, in the tnarket economy, is possibIe only
through abstention from the consumption of a part of income. The
individual saver's employment of his savings for hoarding influences
the determination of money's purchasing power, and may thus reduce
the nominal amount of capital, i.e., its money equivalent; it does not
rendcr any part of the accumulated capital sterile.

XIX. T H E RATE OF INTEREST
I.

T h e Phenomenon of Interest

T has been shown that time preference is a category inherent in

I

every human action. Time preference manifests itself in the
phenomenon of originary interest, i.e., the discount of future goods
as against present goods.
Interest is not merely interest on capital. Interest is not the specific
income derived from the utilization of capital goods. The correspondence between three factors of production-labor, capital, and
land-and three classes of income-wages, profit, and rent-as taught
by the classical economists is untenable. Rent is not the specific
revenue from land. Rent is a general catallactic phenomenon; it plays
in the yield of labor and capital goods the same role it plays in the
yield of land. Furthermore there is no homogcneous source of income
that could be called profit in the sense in which the classical economists applied this term. Profit (in the sense of entrepreneurial profit)
and interest are no more characteristic of capital than they are of land.
The prices of consumers' goods are by the interplay of the forces
operating on the market apportioned to the various complementary
factors cooperating in their production. As the consumers' goods are
present goods, while the factors of production are means for the production of future goods, and as present goods are valued higher than
future goods of the same kind and quantity, the sum thus apportioned,
even in the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy,
falls behind the present price of the consumers' goods concerned.
This difference is the originary interest. It is not specifically connected with any of the three classes of factors of production which
the classical economists distinguished. Entrepreneurial profit and loss
are produced by changes in the data and the resulting price changes
which occur in the passing of the period of production.
Naive reasoning does not see any problem in the current revenue
derived from hunting, fishing, cattle breeding, forestry, and agriculture. Nature generates deer, fish, and cattle and makes them grow,
causes the cows to give milk and the chickens to lay eggs, the trees
to put on wood and to bear fruit, and the seeds to shoot into ears.

5*2

Human Action

He who has a title to appropriate for himself this recurring wealth
enjoys a steady income. Like a stream w-hich continualIy carries new
water, the "strcam of income" flows continually and conveys again
and again new wealth. The whole process is plainly a natural phenomenon. But for thc economist a prohlem is presented in the determination of prices for land, cattle, and all the rest. If future goods were
not bought and sold at a discount as against present goods, the buyer
of land would ham to pay a price which equals the sum of all future
net revenues and which would leave nothing for a current reiterated
income.
The yearly recurring proceeds of the owners of land and cattle
are not marked by any characteristic which would catallactically distinguish them from the procecds stemming from produced factors of
production which are used up sooner or later in the processes of production. The power of disposal over a piece of land is the control of
this field's cooperation in the production of all the fruit which can
ever be grown on it, and the power of disposal over a mine is the
control of its cooperation in the extraction of all the minerals which
can ever be brought to the surface from it. In the same way the ownership of a machine or a hale of cotton is the control of its cooperation
in thc manufacture of all goods which are produced with its cooperation. T h e fundamental fallacy implied in all the productivity and use
approaches to the problem of interest was that they traced back the
phcnomcnon of interest to these productive services rendered by the
factors of production. However, the serviceableness of the factors of
production determines the prices paid for them, not interest. These
prices exhaust the whole difference between the productivity of a
process aided by a definite factor's cooperation and that of a process
lacking this cooperation. The djffercnce between the sum of the
prices of the complen~entaryfactors of production and the products
which emerges even in the absence of changes in the markct data
concerned, is an outcome of the higher valuation of present goods as
compared w i h iumre goods. As production goes on, the factors of
production arc transformed or ripen into present goods of a higher
value. This increment is the source of specific proceeds flowing into
the hands of the owncrs of thc factors of production, of originary
interest.
T h e owners of the material factors of production-as distinct from
the pure entrepreneurs of the imaginary construction of an integration of catallactic functions-harvest two catallactically different
itcms: the prices paid for the productive cooperation of the factors
they control on the one hand and interest on the other hand. These

The Rate of Interest

523

two things must not be confused. It is not permissible to refer, in the
explanation of interest, to the services rendered by the factors of production in the turning out of products.
Intercst is a homogeneous phenomenon. There are no different
sources of interest. Interest on durable goods and interest on consumption-credit are like other kinds of interest an outgrowth of the
higher valuation of present goods as against future goods.
2.

Originary Interest

Originary interest is the ratio of the value assigned to wantsatisfaction in the immediate future and the value assigned to wantsatisfaction in remoter periods of the future. It manifests itself in the
market economy in the discount of future goods as against present
goods. It is a ratio of commodity prices, not a price in itself. There
prevails a tendency toward the equalization of this ratio for a11 commodities. In the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy the rate of originary interest is the same for all commodities.
Originary interest is not "the price paid for the services of capital." T h e higher productivity of more time-consuming roundabout
methods of production which is referred to by Bohm-Bawerk and
by some later economists in the explanation of interest, does not explain the phenomenon. It is, on the contrary, the phenomenon of
originary interest that explains why lcss time-consuming methods of
production are resorted to in spite of the fact that more timeconsuming methods would render a higher output per unit of input.
Moreover, the phenomenon of originary interest explains why pieces
of usable land can be sold and bought at finite prices. If the future
services which a piece of land can render were to be vaIued in the
same way in which its present services are valued, no finite price
would be high enough to impel its owner to sell it. Land could
ncithcr be bought nor sold against definite amounts of rnoncy, nor
bartered against goods which can render only a finite number of
services. Pieces of land would be bartered only against other pieces
of land. A superstructure that can yield during a period of tcn years
an annual revenue of one hundred dollars would be priced (gpart
from the soil on which it is built) at the beginning of this period at
one thousand dollars, at the beginning of the second year at nine
hundred dollars, and so on.
Originary interest is not a price determincd on the market by the
I . This is the popular definition of interest as, for instance, given by EIy,
Adams, Lorenz, and Young, Outlines of Economics (jd ed. New York, rgzo),

p. 493-

524

Human Action

interplay of the denland for and the suppIy of capital or capital
goods. Its height docs not depend on the extent of this dcmand and
supply. It is rather the rate of originary interest that determines both
the demand for and the supply of capital and capital goods. It determines how much of the available supply of goods is to be devoted
to consumption in the immediate future and how much to provision
for remoter periods of the future.
People do not save and accumulate capital because there is interest.
Interest is neither the impetus to saving nor the reward or the compensation granted for abstaining from immediate consumption. I t
is the ratio in the mutual valuation of present goods as against future
goods.
T h e loan market does not determine the rate of interest. It adjusts
the rate of interest on loans to the rate of originary interest as manifested in the discount of future goods.
Originary interest is a category of human action. I t is operative in
any valuation of external things and can never disappear. If one day
the state of affairs were to return which was actual at the close of the
first millennium of the Christian era when people believed that the
uItimate end of all earthly things mas impending, mcn would stop
providing for future secular wants. T h e factors of production would
in their eyes bccome useless and worthlcss. The discount of future
goods as against present goods would not vanish. I t would, on the
contrary, increase beyond all measure. On the other hand, the fading
away of originary interest would mean that people do not care at a11
for want-satisfaction in nearer periods of the future. I t would mean
that they prefer to an apple available today, tomorrow, in one year
or in ten years, two apples available in a thousand or ten thousand
years.
We cannot even think of a world in which originary interest would
not exist as an inexorable element in every kind of action. Whether
there is or is not division of labor and social cooperation and whether
society is organized on the basis of private or of public control of
the means of production, originary interest is always present. In a
socialist commonwealth its role would not differ from that in the
market economy.
~ i i h r n - ~ a w e rhas
k once for all unmasked the fallacies of the nai've
productivjty explanations of interest, ie., of the idea that interest is
the expression of the physical productivity of factors of production.
However, Biihm-Bawcrk has himself based his own theory to some
extent on the productivity approach. In referring in his explanation
to the technological superiority of more time-consuming, roundabout

The Rate of Internt
processes of production, he avoids the crudity of the naive productivity fallacies. But in fact he returns, although in a subtler form,
to the productivity approach. Those later economists who, neglecting the tinie-preference idea, have stressed excIusively the productivity idea contained in Bohm-Bawerk's theory cannot help concluding that originary interest must disappear if men were one day
to reach a state of affairs in which no further lengthening of the
period of production could bring about a further increase in productivity."This is, however, utterly wrong. Originary interest cannot disappear as long as there is scarcity and therefore action.
As long as the world is not transformed into a land of Cockaigne,
men are faced with scarcity and must act and economize; they arc
forced to choose between satisfaction in ncarcr and in remoter periods
of the future because neither for the former nor for the latter can
full contentment be attained. Then a change in the eznployment of
factors of production which withdraws such factors from their employment for want-satisfaction in the nearer future and devotes them
to want-satisfaction in the remoter future must necessarily impair
the state of satisfaction in the nearer future and improve it in the
remoter future. If we were to assume that this is not the case, we
should become embroiIed in insoiuble contradictions. W e may at
best think of a state of affairs in which technological knowledge and
skill have reached a point beyond which no further progress is possible for mortal men. N o new processes increasing the output per unit
of input can henceforth be invented. But if we suppose that some
factors of production are scarce, we must not assunlc that all processes which-apart from the timc they absorb-are the most productive ones are fully utilized, and that no process rendering a
smaller output per unit of input is resorted to merely because of the
fact that it produces its final result sooner than other, physically
more productive processes. Scarcity of factors of production means
that we are in a position to draft plans for the improvement of our
well-being the realization of which is unfeasible because of the insufficient quantity of the means available. It is precisely the unfeasibility of such desirable improvements that constitutes the element of scarcity. The reasoning of the modern supporters of the
productivity approach is misled by the connotations of B6hmBawerk's term roundabout method$ of production and the idea of
2. Cf. Hayek, "The Mythology of Capital," The Quarterly Iournal of Economics, L (igj6), 2 2 3 ff. Howcver Professor Hayek has since partly changed his
point of view. (Cf. his article 'Time-Preference and Productivity, a Reconsideration," Economics, XI1 [ 19451, 22-25.) But the idea criticized in the text is still
widely held by cconornists.

526
Human Action
technological improvement which it suggests. However, if there is
scarcity, there must always be an unused technological opportunity
to improve the state of well-being by a lengthening of the period
of production in some branches of industry, regardless of whether or
not the state of technological knowledge has changed. If the means
are scarce, if the praxeological correlation of ends and means still
exists, there are by logical necessity unsatisfied wants with regard
both to nearer and to remoter periods of the future. There are always
goods the procurement of which we must forego because the way that
leads to their production is too long and would prevent us from
satisfying more urgent needs. The fact that we do not provide more
amply for the future is the outcome of a weighing of satisfaction
in nearer periods of the future against satisfaction in remoter periods
of the future. The ratio which is the outcome of this valuation is
originary interest.
In such a world of perfect technological knowledge a promoter
drafts a plan A according to which a hotel in picturesque, but not
easily accessible, mountain districts and the roads leading to it should
be buiIt. In examining the practicability of this plan he discovers that
the means available are not sufficient for its execution. Calculating
the prospects of the profitability of the investment, he comes to the
conclusion that the expected proceeds are not great enough to
cover the costs of material and labor to be expended and interest
on the capital to be invested. He renounces the execution of project
A and embarks instead upon the realization of another plan, B. According to plan B the hotel is to be erected in a more easily accessible
location which does not offer a11 the advantages of the picturesque
landscape which plan A had selected, but in which it can be built
either with lower costs of construction or finished in a shorter time.
If no interest on the capital invested were to enter into the calculation, the illusion could arise that the state of the market data-supply
of capital goods and the valuations of the public-allows for the
execution of plan A. However, the realization of plan A would withdraw scarce factors of production from employments in which they
could satisfy wants considered more urgent by the consumers. It
would mean a manifest malinvestment, a squandering of the means
available.
A lengthening of the period of production can increase the quantity of output per unit of input or produce goods which cannot be
produced at all within a shorter period of production. But it is not
true that the imputation of the value of this additional wealth to the
capital goods required for the Iengthening of the period of produc-

The Rate of Interest

527

tion generates interest. If one were to assume this, one would relapse
into the crassest errors of the productivity approach, irrefutably exploded by Bohm-Bawerlr. The contribution of the complementary
factors of production to the result of the process is the reason for
their being considered as valuable; it explains the prices paid for
them and is fully taken into account in the determination of these
prices. N o residuum is left that is not accounted for and could explain
interest.
It has been asserted that in the imaginary construction of the
evenly rotating economy no interest would appear.Wowever, it can
be shown that this assertion is incompatible with the assu~nptions
on which the construction of the evenly rotating economy is based.
W e begin with the distinction between two classes of saving: plain
saving and capitalist saving. Plain saving is merely the piling up of
consumers' goods for later consumption. Capitalist saving is the accumulation of goods which are designed for an improvement of
production processes. The aim of plain saving is later consumption;
it is merely postponement of consumption. Sooner or later the goods
accumula;ed will be consumed and nothing will be left. The aim of
capitalist saving is first an improvement in the productivity of effort.
It accumulates capital goods which are cmploped for further production and are not merely reserves for later consumption. The boon
derived from plain saving is later consumption of the stock not instantly consumed but accumulated for later use. The boon derived
from capitalist saving is the increase of the quantity of goods produced or the production of goods which could not be produced at all
without its aid. In constructing the image of an evcnly rotating
(static) economy, economists disregard the process of capital accumulation; the capital goods are given and remain, as, according
to the underlying assumptions, no changes occur in the data. There
is neither accumulation of new capital through saving, nor consumption of capital availabIe through a surplus of consumption over income, k . , current production minus the funds required for the
maintcnance of capital. It is now our task to demonstrate that these
assumptions are incompatible with the idea that there is no interest.
There is no need to dwell, in this reasoning, upon plain saving. T h e
objective of plain saving is to provide for a future in which the saver
could possibly be less amply supplied than in the present. Yet, one of
the fundamental assumptions characterizing the imaginary construction of the evcnly rotating economy is that the future does not differ
3. Cf. J. Schumpeter, The Theory of Econowzic Development, trans. by £2.
Opie (Cambridge, 19341,pp. 34-46, 54.

j28

Human Action

at all from the present, that the actors are fully aware of this fact
and act accordingly. Hence, in the frame of this construction, no
room is left for the phenomenon of plain saving.
It is different with the fruit of capitalist saving, the accumulated
stock of capital goods. There is in the evenly rotating economy
neither saving and accumulation of additional capital goods nor eating up of already existing capita1 goods. Both phenomena would
amount to a change in the data and would thus disturb the even
rotation of the imaginary system. hTow, the magnitude of saving
and capital accumulation in the past-i.e., in the period preceding
the establishment of the evenly rotating economy-was adjusted to
the height of the rate of interest. If-with the estabIishment of the
conditions of the evenly rotating economy-the owners of the
capital goods were no longer to receive any interest, the conditions
which were operative in the allocation of the available stocks of
goods to the satisfaction of wants in the various periods of the future
would be upset. The altered state of affairs requires a new allocation.
Also in the evenly rotating economy the difference in the valuation
of want-satisfaction in various periods of the future cannot disappear.
Also in the frame of this imaginary construction, people will assign
a higher value to an apple available today as against an apple available
in ten or a hundred years. If the capitalist no longer receives interest,
the balance between satisfaction in nearer and remoter periods of
the future is disarranged. T h e fact that a capitalist has maintained
his capital at just ~oo,ooodollars was conditioned by the fact that
~oo,ooopresent dollars were equal to 105,ooo dollars available twelve
months later. These 5,000 dollars were in his eyes sufficient to outweigh the advantages to be expected from an instantaneous consumption of a part of this sum. If interest payments are eliminated,
capital consumption ensues.
This is the essential deficiency of the static system as Schumpeter
depicts it. It is not sufficient to assume that the capital equipment of
such a system has been accumuiated in the past, that it is now avaiiable to the extent of this previous accumulation and is henceforth
unalterably maintained at this level. W e must also assign in the frame
of this imaginary system a role to the operation of forces which bring
about such a maintenance. If one eliminates the capitalist's role as
receiver of interest, one replaces it by the capitalist's role as consumer
of capital. There is no longer any reason why the owner of capital
goods should abstain from employing them for consumption. Under
the assumptions implied in the imaginary construction of static conditions (the evenly rotating economy) there is no need to keep them

T h e Rate of Interest

529

in reserve for rainy days. But even if, inconsistently enough, we
were to assume that a part of them is devoted to this purpose and
therefore withheld from current consumption, at least that part of
capital will be consumed which corresponds to the amount that
capitalist saving exceeds plain saving.'
If there were no originary interest, capital goods would not be
devoted to in~mediateconsumption and capital would not be consumed. O n the contrary, under such an unthinkable and unimaginable state of affairs there would be no consumption at all, but only
saving, accumulation of capital, and investment. N o t the impossible
disappearance of originary intercst, but the abolition of payment of
interest to the owncrs of capital, would resuIt in capital consumption.
T h e capitalists would consume their capital goods and their capita1
preciseIy because there is originary interest and present want-satisfaction is preferred to later satisfaction.
Therefore there cannot be any question of abolishing interest by
any institutions, laws, and devices of bank manipulation. H e who
wants t o "abolish" interest will have to induce people to value
an apple available in a hundred years no less than a present apple.
W h a t can be abolished by laws and decrees is merely the right of
the capitalists to receive interest. But such laws would bring about
capital consumption and would very soon throw mankind back
into the original state of natural poverty.

3 . T h e Height of Interest Rates
In plain saving and in the capitalist saving of isolated economic
actors the difference in thc valuation of want satisfaction in various
p - i o d s of the future manifests itself in the extent to which people
pavide in a more ample way for nearer than for remoter periods of
the future. Under the conditions of a market economy the rate of
originary intercst is, provided the assumptions involved in the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy are present, equal
to the ratio of a definite amount of money available today and the
amount availabk at a later date which is considered as its equivaknt.
T h e ratc of originary interest directs the investment activities of
the entrepreneurs. It determines the length of waiting time and of the
period of production in every branch of industry.
People often raise the question of which rate of interest, a "high" or
a "low," stimulates saving and capital accumulation more and which
4. Cf. Robbins, "On a Certain Ambiguity in the Conception of Stationary
Equilibrium," The Economic Journal, XL (193o),2 1 I ff.

530
Human Action
less. T h e question makes n o sense. T h e lower the discount attached
to future goods is, the lower is the rate of originary interest. People
do not save more because the rate of originary intcrcst rises, and the
rate of originary interest does not drop on account of an increase in
the amount of saving. Changes in the originary rates of interest and
in the amount of saving are-other things, especially the institutional
conditions, being equal-two aspects of the same phenomenon. T h e
disappearance of originary interest would be tantamount to the disappearance of consumption. T h e increase of originary interest beyond all measure would be tantamount to the disappearance of
saving and any provision for the future.
T h e quantity of the available supply of capital goods influences
neither the rate of originary interest nor the amount of further saving.
Even the most plentifuI supply of capital need not neccssarily bring
about either a lowering of the rate of originary intcrcst or a drop in
the propensity to save. T h e increase in capital accumulation and the
per capita quota of capital invested which is a characteristic mark of
economically advanced nations does not necessarily either lower the
rate of originary interest or weaken the propensity of individuaIs to
make additiona1 savings. PeopIe are, in dealing with these problems,
for the most part misled by comparing merely the market rates of
interest as they are determined on the loan market. However, these
gross rates arc not merely expressive of the height of originary interest. They contain, as will be shown later, other elements besides, the
effect of which accounts for the fact that the gross rates are as a rule
higher in poorer countries than in richer ones.
It is generally asserted that, other things being equal, the better
individuals are supplied for the immediate future, the better they
provide for wants for the rernotcr future. Consequently, it is said,
the amount of total saving and capital accumulation wifhin an economic system depends on the arrangement of the population into
groups of different income levels. In a society with approximate income equality there is, it is said, less saving than in a society in which
there is more inequality. There is a gr.rain of truth in sudh obscrvations. However, they are statements about psychological facts and
as such lack the universal validity and necessity inherent in praxeological statements. Moreover, the other things the equality of which
they presuppose comprehend the various individuals' valuations, their
subjective value judgments in weighing the pros and cons of immediate consumption and of postponement of consumption. There are
certainly many individuals whose behavior they describe correctly,
but there also are other individuals who act in a different way. The

The fire of Interest

531

French peasants, although for the most part people of moderate
wealth and income, were in the nineteenth century widely known
for their parsimonious habits, while the wealthy members of the
aristocracy and the heirs of huge fortunes amassed in commerce
and industry were no Iess renowned for their profligacy.
It is therefore impossible to formulate any praxeological theorem
concerning the relation of the amount of capital available in the whole
nation or to individual people on the one hand and the amount of
saving or capital consumption and the height of the originary rate
of interest on the other hand. The allocation of scarce resources to
want satisfaction in various periods of the future is determined by
value judgments and indirectly hy all those factors which constitute
the individuality of the acting man.

4. Originary Interest in the Changing Economy
So far we have dealt with the problem of originary interest under
certain assumptions: that the turnover of goods is effected by the
employment of neutral money; that saving, capital accurnuiation,
and the determination of interest rates are not hampered by institutionaI obstacles; and that the whole economic process goes on in the
frame of an evenly rotating economy. W e shall eliminate the first
two of thcsc assumptions in the following chapter. Now we want to
deal with originary interest in a changing economy.
He who wants to provide for the satisfaction of future needs must
correctly anticipate these needs. If he fails in this understanding of
the future, his provision will prove less satisfactory or totalIy futile.
There is no such thing as an abstract saving that could provide for
all classes of want-satisfaction and would be neutral with regard to
changes occurring in conditions and valuations. Originary interest can
therefore in the changing economy never appear in a pure unalloyed
form. It is only in the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating
economy that the mere passing of time matures originary interest; in
the passage of time and with the progress of the process of production
Inore and more value accrues, as it were, to the complementary
factors of production; with the termination of the process of production the lapse of time has generated in the price of the product the
full quota of originary interest. In the changing economy during the
period of production there also arise synchronously other changes
in valuations. Some goods are valued higher than previously, some
lower. These alterations are the source from which entrepreneurial
profits and losses stem. Only those entrepreneurs who in their planning

532

Human Action

have correctly anticipated the future state of the market are in a
position to reap, in selling the products, an excess over the costs of
prod~~ction
(inclusive of net originary interest) expended. An entreprcneur who has failed in his speculative understanding of the future
can sell his products, if at all, only at prices which do not cover completcly his expenditures plus originary interest on the capital invested.
Like entrepreneurial profit and loss, intcrcst is not a price, but a
magnitude which is to be disengaged by a particular mode of computation from the price of the products of successful business operations. Thc gross difference between the price at which a commodity
is sold and the costs expended in its production (exclusive of interest
on the capital invested) was called profit in the terminology of
British classical economics."Jodern economics conceives this magnitude as a complex of catallactically disparate items. The excess of
gross receipts over expenditures which the classical economists called
profit includes the price for the entrepreneur's own labor employed
in the process of production, interest on the capital invested, and
finally entrepreneurial profit proper. If such an excess has not been
reaped at all in the sale of the products, the cntrepreneur not only fails
to get profit proper, he receives neither an equivalent for the market
value of the labor hc has contributed nor interest on the capital invested.
The breaking down of gross profit (in the classical sense of the
term) into managerial wages, interest, and entrepreneurial profit is
not merely a device of economic theory. It devcloped, with progressing perfection in business practices of accountancy and calculation,
in the field of commercial routine independently of the reasoning
of the economists. The judicious and sensible businessman does not
attach practical significance to the confused and garbled concept of
profit as employed by the classical economists. His notion of costs of
production includes the potcntial market price of his own services
contributed, the interest paid on capital borrow-ed, and the potential
interest hc could earn, according to the conditions of the market, on
his own capital invested in the enterprise by lending it to other people.
Only the excess of proceeds over the costs so calculated is in his
eyes entrepreneuria1 p r ~ f i t . ~
T h e precipitation of entreprencuria1 wages from the con~pIexof a11
5. Cf. R. Whately, Elenzents of Logic (9th ed. London, 18481, pp. 354ff.; E.
Cannan, A History of the Theories of Production and Distribution in English
Political Economy from 1776 t o 2848 (3d ed. London, 1924). pp. 189ff.
6. But, of course, the present-day intentional confusion of all economic concepts is conducive to obscuring this distinction. Thus, in the United States, in
dealing with thc dividends paid by corporations people speak of "profits."

T h e Rate of Interest

533

the other items included in the profit concept of classical economics
presents no particular problem. It is more difficult to sunder entrepreneurial profit from originary interest. In the changing economy
interest stipulated in loan contracts is always a gross magnitude out
of which the pure rate of originary interest must be computed by a
particular process of computation and analytical repartition. It has
been shown already that in every act of lending, even apart from
the probIem of changes in the monetary unit's purchasing power,
there is an element of entrepreneurial venture. The granting of
credit is necessarily always an entrepreneurial speculation which
can possibly result in failure and the loss of a part or of the total
amount lent. Every interest stipulated and paid in loans includes not
only originary interest but also entrepreneurial profit.
This fact for a long time misled the attempts to construct a satisfactory theory of interest. It was only the elaboration of the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy that made it possible
to distinguish precisely between originary interest and entrepreneuriaI profit and loss.

5. T h e Computation of Interest
Originary interest is the outgrowth of valuations unceasingly
fluctuating and changing. It fluctuates and changes with them. T h e
custom of computing interest pro anno is merely commercial usage
and a convenient rule of reckoning. It does not affect the height of
the interest rates as determined by the market.
T h e activities of the entrepreneurs tend toward the establishment
of a uniform rate of originary interest in the whole market economy.
If there turns up in one sector of the market a margin between the
prices of present goods and those of future goods which deviates from
the margin prevailing in other sectors, a trend toward equalization
is brought about by the striving of businessmen to enter those sectors
in which this margin is higher and to avoid those in which it is lower.
The finaI rate of originary interest is the same in all parts of the
market of the evenly rotating economy.
The valuations resulting in the emergence of originary interest
prefer satisfaction in a nearer period of the future to satisfaction of
the same kind and extent in a remoter period of the future. Nothing
would justify the assun~ptionthat this discounting of satisfaction in
remoter periods progresses continuousIy and evenly. If we were to
assume this, we would imply that the period of provision is infinite.
However, the mere fact that individuals differ in their provision

5 34

Human Action

for future needs and that even to the most provident actor provision
beyond a definite period appears supererogatory, forbids us to think
of the period of provision as infinite.
T h e usages of the loan market must not mislead us. It is customary
to stipulate a uniform rate of interest for the whole duration of a
loan contract and to apply a uniform rate in computing compound
interest. T h c real determination of intcrest rates is independent of
these and other arithmetical devices of interest computation. If the
rate of interest is unaltcrably fixed by contract for a period of time,
intcrvening changes in the market rate of interest are reflected in
corresponding changes in the prices paid for the principal, due
allowance being rnadc for the fact that the amount of principal to be
paid back at thc maturity of the loan is unalterably stipulated. It
does not affect the result whether one calculates with an unchanging
rate of intercst and changing- prices of the principal or with changing
intercst rates and an unchanging amount of the principal, or with
changes in both magnitudes.
T h e terms of a loan contract arc not independent of the stipulated
duration of thc loan. K o t only because those components of the
gross rate of market interest which made it deviate from the rate of
originary interest are affected by differences in the duration of the
loan, but also on account of factors which bring about changes in the
rate of originary interest, loan contracts are valued and appraised
differently according to the duration of the loan stipulated.
7. There are, of course, also deviations from this usage.

XX. INTEREST, CREDIT EXPANSION,
AND T H E TRADE CYCLE
I.

The Problems

the market economy in which all acts of interpersonal exchange
1originary
are performed by the intermediary of money, the category of
interest manifests itself primarily in the interest on money
N

loans.
It has been pointed out already that in the imaginary construction
of the evenly rotating economy, the rate of originary interest is
uniform. There prevails in the whole system only one rate of interest. The rate of interest on loans coincides with the rate of originary
interest as manifested in the ratio between prices of present and of
future goods. W e may call this rate the neutral rate of interest.
The evenly rotating economy presupposes neutral money. As
money can never be neutral, special problems arise.
If the money relation-i.e., the ratio between the demand for and
the supply of money for cash holding-changes, all prices of goods
and services are affected. These changes, however, do not affect the
prices of the various goods and services at the same time and to the
same extent. The resulting modifications in the wealth and income
of various individuals can also alter the data determining the height
of originary interest. The final state of the rate of originary interest
to the establishment of which the system tends after the appearance
of changes in the money relation, is no longer that final state toward

-..L:-L
:
, L - 2 L - - - l _ J 1__r--- TL.-- & L _ 2-:-2-- 1---- - r ------- L ._
-1.W l l l C l l 1L l l d U LGIlUCU U G l U I G . l l l U b y LlIC U l l V l l l g I U I C C 0 1 IIIULICY l l a b 111C

power to bring about lasting changes in the final rate of originary interest and neutral interest.
Then there is a second, even more momentous, problem which,
of course, may also be looked upon as another aspect of the same
problem. Changes in the money relation may under certain circumstances first affect the loan market in which the demand for and supply of loans influences the market rate of interest on loans, which we
may call the gross money (or market) rate of interest. Can such
changes in the gross money rate cause the net rate of interest included

Human Action

536

in it to deviate lastingly from the height which corresponds to the
rate of originary intercst, i.e., the difference between the valuation
of present and futurc goods? Can events on the loan market partialIy
or totally eliminate originary interest? No economist will hesitate to
answer thcse questions in the negative. But then a further problem
arises: How docs the interplay of the market factors readjust the
gross money rate to the height conditioned by the rate of originary
interest?
These are great problems. These were the problems economists
tricd to solve in discussing banking, fiduciary media and circulation
credit, credit cxpansion, gratuitousness or nongratuitousness of credit,
the cyclical movements of trade, and all other problems of indirect
exchange.
2.

The Entreprcneurial Component in the Gross
Market Rate of Interest

The market rates of interest on loans arc not pure interest rates.
Among the components contributing to their determination there
are also elements which are not interest. T h e moneylender is always
an entrepreneur. Every grant of credit is a speculative entrepreneurial
venture, the success or failure of which is uncertain. The lender is
always faced with the possibility that he may lose a part or the whole
of the principal lent. His appraisal of this danger determines his
conduct in bargaining with the prospective debtor about the terms of
the contract.
There can never be perfect safety either in moneylending or in
other classes of credit transactions and deferred payments. Debtors,
guarantors, and warrantors may become insolvent, collateral and
mortgages may become worthless. The creditor is always a
virtual partner of the debtor or a virtual owner of the pledged and
mortgaged property. He can be affected by changes in the market
data concerning them. He has linked his fate with that of the debtor
or with the changes occurring in the price of the collateral. Capital
as such does not bear interest; it must be well employed and invested
not only in order to yield interest, but also lest it disappear entirely.
The dictum pecunia pecuniawz parere non potest (money cannot
beget money) is rncaningful in this sense, which, of course, differs
radically f r o ~ nthe sense which ancient and medieval philosophers
attached to it. Gross interest can be reaped only by creditors who
have been successful in thcir lending. If they earn any net interest
at all, it is included in a yield which contains more than merely net

Intewst, Credit E.xpamion, the Trade Cycle

537

interest. Net intcrcst is a magnitude which only analytical thinking
can extract from the gross proceeds of the creditor.
T h e entrepreneurial component included in the creditor's g o s s
proceeds is determined by all those factors which are operative in
every entrepreneurial venture. I t is, moreover, codetermined by the
legal and institutional setting. T h e contracts which place the debtor
and his fortune or the collateral as a buffer betwecn the creditor and
the disastrous consequences of maIinvestmcnt of the capital lent,
arc conditioned bv laws and institutions. T h e creditor is less exposcd
to loss and failure'than the debtor only in so far as this legal and institutional framcwork makes it possiblc for him to enforce his claims
against refractory debtors. Thcrc is, however, no need for economics
to enter into a dctailed scrutiny of thc legal aspects involved in bonds
and debentures, preferred stock, mortgages, and other kinds of credit
transactions.
T h e entrepreneurial component is present in all species of loans.
I t is customary t o distinguish bctween consumption or personal loans
on the one hand, and productive or business loans on the other. T h e
characteristic mark of the formcr class is that it enables the borrorver
to spend expected future proceeds. In acquiring a claim to a share in
these future proceeds, the lender becomes an entrepreneur, as in
acquiring a claim to a share in the futurc proceeds of a business. T h e
particular uncertainty of the outcome of his lending consists in the
uncertainty about these future proceeds.
I t is furthermore customary to distinguish between private and
public loans, ie., loans to governments and subdivisions of governments. T h e particular uncertainty inherent in such loans concerns
the life of secuIar power. Enlpires may crumble and governments
may bc overthrown by revolutionaries who are not prepared t o assume responsibility for the clcbts contracted by their predecessors.
That thcre is, besides, something basically vicious in all kinds of
long-term government debts, has been pointed out a1ready.l
Over all species of deferred payments hangs, like sword of
DarnocIcs, the danger of government interference. Public opinion
has always heen biased against creditors. It identifies creditors with
the idle rich and debtors with the industrious poor. I t abhors the
former as ruthless esploitcrs and pities the latter as innocent victims
of oppression. I t considers government action designed to curtail the
claims of the creditors as measures extremcly beneficial to the immcnsc majority at the expense of a small minority of hardboiled
usurers. I t did not notice at all that nineteentb-century capitalist inI . Cf. above, pp. 227-229.

a

538

Human Action

novations have wholly changed the composition of the classes of
creditors and debtors. In the days of Solon the Athenian, of ancient
Rome's agrarian laws, and of the Middle Ages, the creditors were by
and large the rich and the debtors the poor. But in this age of bonds
and debentures, mortgage banks, savings banks, life insurance policies,
and social security benefits, the masses of people with more moderate
income are rather themselves creditors. On the other hand, the rich,
in their capacity as owners of common stock, of plants, farms, and
real estate, are more often debtors than creditors. In asking for the
expropriation of creditors, the masses are unwittingly attacking their
own particular interests.
With public opinion in this state, the creditor's unfavorable chance
of being harmed by anticreditor measures is not balanced by a
favorable chance of being privileged by antidebtor measures. This
unbalance would bring about a unilateral tendency toward a rise
of the entrepreneurial component contained in the gross rate of
interest if the political danger were limited to the loan market, and
would not in the same way affect today all kinds of private ownership of the means of production. As things are in our day, no kind of
investment is safe against the political dangers of a general expropriation of all private property. A capitalist cannot reduce the vulnerability of his weaIth by p;eferring direct investment in business to
lending his capital to business or to the government.
T h e political risks involved in moneylending do not affect the
height of originary interest; they affect the entrepreneurial component included in the gross market rate. In the limiting case-i.e., in a
situation in which the impending nullification of all contracts concerning deferred payments is generally expected-they would cause
the entrepreneurial component to increase beyond all m e a s ~ r e . ~

3 . T h e Price Premium as a Component of the Gross
Market Rate of Interest
Money is neutral if the cash-induced changes in the monetary unit's
purchasing power affect at the same time and to the same extent
the prices of all commodities and services. With neutral money, a
neutral rate of interest would be conceivable, provided there were
no deferred payments. If there were deferred payments and if we
2. The difference between this case (case b ) and the case of the expected end
rif all earthly things dealt with on p. 524 (case a) is this: in case a originary
interest increases beyond all measure because future goods become entirely
worthless; in case b originary interest does not change while the entrepreneurial
component increase beyond all measure.

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

539

disregard the entrepreneurial position of the creditor and the ensuing
entrepreneurial component in the gross rate of interest, we must
furthermore assume that the eventuality of future changes in purchasing power is taken into account in stipulating the terms of the contract. The principal is to be multiplied periodically by the index
number and thus to be increased or decreased in accordance with the
changes that have come to pass in purchasing power. With the adj ustment of the principal, the amount from which the rate of interest
is to be calculated changes too. Thus, this rate is a neutral rate of interest.
With neutral money, neutralization of the rate of interest could
also be attained by another stipulation, provided the parties are in a
position to anticipate correctly the future changes in purchasing
power. They could stipulate a gross rate of interest containing an
allowance for such changes, a percentile addendum to, or subtrahendum from, the rate of originary interest. W e may call this allowance the-positive or negative-price premium. In the case of a
quickly progressing deflation, the negative price premium could not
only swallow the whole rate of originary interest, but even reverse
the gross rate into a minus quantity, a rate to be passed on the debtor's
account. If the price premium is correctly calculated, neither the
creditor's nor the debtor's position is affected by intervening changes
in purchasing power. The rate of interest is neutral.
However, all these assumptions are not only imaginary, they cannot
even hypothetically be thought of without contradictions. In the
changing economy, the rate of interest can never be neutral. In the
changing economy, there is no uniform rate of originary interest;
there only prevails a tendency toward the establishment of such m i formity. Before the final state of originary interest is attained, new
changes in the data emerge which divert anew the movement of interest rates toward a new final state. Whcre everything is unceasingly
in flux, no neutral rate of interest can be established.
In the world of reality all prices are fluctuating and acting men are
forced to take full account of these changes. Entrepreneurs embark
upon business ventures and capitalists change their investments only
because they anticipate such changes and want to profit from the&.
T h e market economy is essentially characterized as a social systcm
in which there prevails an incessant urge toward improvement. The
most provident and enterprising individuals are driven to earn profit
by readjusting again and again the arrangement of production activities so as to fill in the best possible way the needs of the consumers,
both those needs of which the consumers themselvcs are already

aware and those latent needs of the satisfaction of which they have
not yet thought thcmselves. These speculative ventures of the promoters revolutionize afresh each day the structure of prices and
thereby also the height of the gross market rate of interest.
H e who expects a risc in certain prices enters the loan market as a
borrower and is ready to allow a higher gross rate of interest than he
would allow if he were to expect a less momentous rise in prices or
no risc at all. On the other hand, the lender, if he himself expects a
rise in prices, grants Ioans only if the gross rate is higher than it would
be under a state of the market in which less momentous or no upward
changes in prices are anticipated. The borrower is not deterred by a
higher rate if his project seems to offer such good chances that it can
afford higher costs. T h e lender would abstain from lending and would
himself enter the market as an cntrcpreneur and bidder for commodities and services if the gross rate of interest were not to compensate
him for the profits he could reap this way. The expectation of rising
prices thus has thc tendency to make the gross rate of interest rise,
while the expectation of dropping prices makes it drop. If the expected changes in the price structure concern only a limited group
of commodities and services, and are counterbalanced by the expectation of an opposite change in the prices of other goods, as is the case
in the absence of changes in the money relation, the two opposite
trends by and large counterpoise each other. But if the money relation
is sensibly altered and a general rise or fall in the prices of all commodities and services is expected, one tendency carries on. A positive
or negative price premium emerges in all deals concerning deferred
payments.'
The role of the price premium in the changing economy is different from that we ascribed to it in the hypothetical and unrealizable
scheme developed above. It can never entircly remove, even as far
as credit operations alone are concerned, the effects of changes in the
money relation; it can never make interest rates neutral. It cannot
alter the fact that money is essentially equipped with a driving force
of its own. Even if all actors were to know correctly and completely
the quantitative data concerning the changes in the supply of money
(in the broader sense) in the whole economic system, the dates on
which such changes were to occur and what individuals were to be
first affected by them, they would not be in a position to know beforehand whether and to what extent the demand for money for cash
holding would change and in what temporal sequence and to what
extent the prices of the various commodities would change. The
3. Cf. Irving Fisher, T h e Rate of Interest (New York, 19071, pp. 77 ff.

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

541

price premium could counterpoise the effects of changes in the money
relation upon the substantial importance and the economic significance of crcdit contracts only if its appearance were to precede the
occurrence of the price changes generated by the alteration in the
money relation. It would have to be the rcsult of a reasoning by virtue
of which the actors try to compute in advance the date and the extent
of such price changes with regard to all commodities and services
which dircctly or indirectly count for their own state of satisfaction.
However, such computations cannot be established because their
performance would require a perfect knowledge of future conditions
and valuations.
?he emergence of the price premium is not the product of an
arithmetical operation which could provide reliable knowledge and
eliminate the uncertainty concerning the future. It is the outcome
of the promoters' understanding of the future and their calculations
based on such an understanding. It comes into existencc step by step
as soon as first a few and then successively more and more actors become aware of the fact that the market is faced with cash-induced
changes in the money relation and consequently with a trend oriented
in a definite direction. Only when people begin to buy or to sell in
order to take advantage of this trend, does the price premium come
into existence.
It is necessary to realize that the price premium is the outgrowth
of speculations having regard for anticipated changes in the money
relation. What induces it, in the case of the expectation that an inflationary trend will keep on going, is already the first sign of that
phenomenon which later, when it becomes general, is called "flight
into real values" and finally produces the crack-up boom and the
crash of thc monetary system concerned. As in every case of the
understanding of future hevelopments, it is possible that the speculators may err, that the inff ationary or deflationary movement will be
stopped or slowed down, and that prices will differ from what they
expected.
T h e increased propensity to buy or to sell, which generates the
price premium, affects as a rule short-term loans sooner and to a
greater extent than long-term loans. As far as this is the case, the price
premium affects the market for short-term loans first, and only later,
by virtue of the concatenation of all parts of the market, also the
market for long-term loans. However, there are instances in which
a price premium in long-term loans appears independently of what
is going on with regard to short-term loans. This was especialIy the
case in international lending in the days in which there was still a

542
Human Action
live international capital market. It happened occasionally that lenders
were confident with regard to the short-term deveIopment of a
foreign country's national currency; in short-term loans stipulated
in this currency there was no price premium at all or only a slight
one. But the appraisal of the long-term aspects of the currency concerned was less favorable, and in long-term contracts a considerable
price premium was taken into account. The result was that long-term
loans stipulated in this currency could be floated only at a higher rate
than the same debtor's loans stipulated in terms of gold or a foreign
currency.
W e have shown one reason why the price premium can at best
practically deaden, but never eliminate entirely, the repercussions of
cash-induced changes in the money relation upon the content of
credit transactions. (A second reason will be dealt with in the next
section.) The price premium always lags behind the changes in purchasing power because what generates it is not the change in the supply of money (in the broader sense), but the-necessarily lateroccurring-effects of these changes upon the price structure. Only
in the final state of a ceaseless inflation do things become different.
The panic of the currency catastrophe, the crack-up boom, is not
only characterized by a tendency for prices to rise beyond all measure, but also by a rise beyond ail measure of the positive price premium. hTo gross rate of interest, however great, appears to a prospective lender high enough to compensate for the losses expected from
the progressing drop in the monetary unit's purchasing power. He
abstains from lending and prefers to buy himself "real" goods. The
loan market comes to a standstill.

4. The Loan Market
The gross rates of interest as determined on the loan market are
not uniform. The entrepreneurial component which they always inciude varies according to the pecuiiar characteristics of the specific
deal. It is one of the most serious shortcomings of all historical and
statistical studies devoted to the movement of interest rates that they
neglect this factor. It is useless to arrange data concerning interest
rates of the open ~narketor the discount rates of the central banks in
time series. The various data available for the construction of such
time series are incommensurable. The same central bank's rate of
discount meant something different in various periods of time. The
institutional conditions affecting the activities of various nations'
central banks, their private banks, and their organized loan markets

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

543

are so different, that it is entirely misleading to compare the nominal
interest rates without paying full regard to these diversities. W e know
a priori that, other things being equal, the lenders are intent upon
preferring high interest rates to low ones, and the debtors upon preferring low rates to high ones. But these other things are never equal.
There prevails upon the loan market a tendency toward the equalization of gross interest rates for loans for which the factors determining
the height of the entrepreneurial component and the price premium
are equal. This knowledge provides a mental tool for the interpretation of the facts concerning the history of interest rates. Without
the aid of this knowledge, the vast historical and statistical material
available would be merely an accumulation of meaningless figures.
In arranging time series of the prices of certain primary commodities,
empiricism has at least an apparent justification in the fact that the
price data dealt with refer to the same physical object. I t is a spurious
excuse indeed as prices are not related to the unchanging physical
properties of things, but t o the changing values which acting men
attach to them. But in the study of interest rates, even this lame excuse cannot be advanced. Gross interest rates as they appear in reality
have nothing else in common than those characteristics which catallactic theory sees in them. T h e y are complex phenomena and can
never be used for the construction of an empirical or a posteriori
theory of interest. They can neither verify nor falsify what economics
teachis about the problems involved. T h e y constitute, if carefully
analyzed with all the knowledge economics conveys, invaluable documentation for economic history; they are of no avail for economic
theory.
I t is customary to distinguish the market for short-term loans
(money market) from the market for long-term loans (capital market). A more penetrating analysis must even go further in classifying
loans according to their duration. Besides, there are differences with
regard to the legal characteristics which the terms of the contract
assign to the iender's ciaim. i n short, the ioan market is not homogeneous. But the most conspicuous differences arise from the entrepreneurial component included in the gross rates of interest. I t is
this that people refer to when asserting that credit is based on trust or
confidence.
T h e connexity between all sectors of the loan market and the
gross rates of interest determined on them is brought about by the
inherent tendency of the net rates of interest included in these gross
rates toward the final state of originary interest. W i t h regard t o this
tendency, catallactic theory is free td deal with the market rate of

544
Human Action
interest as if it were a uniform phenomenon, and to abstract from the
cntrcpreneurial component which is necessarily always included in
the gross rates and from the price premium which is occasionally included.
The prices of all commodities and services are at any instant moving
toward a final state. If this final state were ever to be reached, it
would show in the ratio between the prices of present goods and
future goods the final state of originary interest. However, the changing economy never reaches the imaginary final state. S e w data
emerge again and again and divert the trend of prices from the previous goal of their movement toward a different final state to which
a different rate of originary interest may correspond. In the rate of
originary interest there is no more permanence than in prices and
wage rates.
TThose people whose provident action is intent upon adjusting
the employment of thc factors of production to the changes occurring
in the data-viz., the entrepreneurs and promoters-base their calculations upon the prices, wage rates, and interest rates as determined on the market. They discover discrepancies between the
present prices of the complementary factors of production and the
anticipated prices of the products minus the market rate of interest,
and are eager to profit from them. The role which the rate of interest
plays in these deliberations of the planning businessman is obvious.
It shows him how far lie can go in withholding factors of production
from employment for want-satisfaction in nearer periods of the future
and in dedicating them to want satisfaction in remoter periods. It
shows him what period of production conforms in every concrete
case to the difference which the public makes in the ratio of valuation
between present goods and future goods. It prevents him from embarking upon projects the execution of which would not agree with
the limited amount of capital goods provided by the saving of the
public.
It is in influencing this primordial function of the rate of interest
that the driving force of money can become operative in a particular
way. Cash-induced changes in the money relation can under certain
circumstances affect the loan market before they affect the prices
of commodities and of labor. The increase or decrcase in the supply
of money (in the broader sense) can increase or decrease the supply
of money offered on the loan market and thereby lower or raise the
gross market rate of interest although no change in the rate of original
interest has taken place. If this happens, the market rate deviates from
the height which the state of originary interest and the supply of

Interest, Credit Expansio~~,
the Trade Cycle

545

capital goods available for production would require. Then the
market rate of interest fails to fulfill the function it plays in guiding
entrepreneurial decisions. It frustrates the entrepreneur's calculation
and diverts his actions from those lines in which they would in the
best possible way satisfy the most urgent needs of the consumers.
Then there is a second important fact to realize. If, other things
being equal, the supply of money (in the broader sense) increases
or decreases and thus brings about a general tendency for prices to
rise or to drop, a positive or negative price prcmium would have to
appear and to raisc or lower the gross rate of market interest. But
if such changes in the money relation affect first the loan market,
they bring about just the opposite changes in the configuration of
the gross market rates of interest. While a positive or negative price
premium would be required to adjust the market rates of interest to
the changes in the money relation, gross interest rates are in fact
dropping or rising. 'This is the second reason why the instrumentality
of the price premium cannot entirely eliminate the repercussions of
cash-induced changes in the money relation upon the content of contracts concerning deferred payments. Its operation begins too late, it
lags behind the changes in purchasing power, as has been shown above.
Now we see that under certain circumstances the forces that push in
the opposite direction manifest themselves sooner on the market than
the price premium.

5 . T h e Effects of Changes in the Money Relation
Upon Originary Interest
Like every change in the market data, changes in the money relation can possibly influence the rate of originary interest. -4ccording
to the inflationist view of history, inflation by and large tends to
increase the earnings of the entrepreneurs. Commodity prices rise
sooner and to a steeper level than wage rates. On the one hand, wage
earners and salaried peopie, ciasses who spend the greater part of
their income for consumption and save little, are adversely affected
and must accordingly restrict their expenditures. On the other hand,
the proprietary strata of the population, whose propensity to save
a considerable part of their income is much greater, are favored; they
do not increase their consumption in proportion, but also increase
their savings. Thus in the community as a whole there arises a tendency
toxvard an intensified accumulation of new capital. Additional investment is the corollary of the restriction of consumption imposed
upon that part of the population which consumes the much greater

546
Human Action
part of the annual produce of the economic system. This forced
saving lowers the rate of originary interest. It accclcrates the pace of
economic progress and the improvement in technological methods.
It is important to realize that such forced saving can originate from
an inflationary movement and actually often did so originate in the
past. In dealing with the effects of changes in the money relation upon
the height of interest rates, one must not neglect the fact that such
changes can under certain circumstances rcally alter the rate of
originary interest. But several other facts must be taken into account,
too.
First one must realize that forced saving can result from inflation,
but need not necessarily. It depends on thc particular data of each
instance of inflation whether or not the rise in wage ratcs lags behind
the rise in commodity prices. A tendency for real wage rates to drop
is not an inescapable consequence of a decline in the monetary unit's
purchasing power. It could happen that nominal wage rates rise
more than or sooner than commodity pricesn4
Furthermore, it is necessary to remember that the greater propensity of the wealthier classes to save and to accumulate capital is merely
a psychological and not a praxeological fact. It could happen that
these pcople to whom the inflationary movcrnent conveys additional
proceeds do not save and invest their boon but employ it for an increase in their consumption. It is impossible to predict with the
apodictic definiteness which characterizes all theorems of economics,
in what way those profiting from the inflation will act. History can
tell us what happened in the past. But it cannot assert that it must
happen in the future.
It w-ould be 3 serious blunder to neglect the fact that inflation also
generates forces which tend toward capital consumption. One of its
consequences is that it falsifies cconomic calculation and accounting.
It produces the phenomenon of imaginary or apparent profits. If the
annual depreciation quotas are determined in such a way as not to
pay full regard to the fact that the replacement of worn-out equipment will require higher costs than the amount for which it was purchased in the past, they are obviously insufficient. If in selling inventories and products the whole difference bctween the price spent for
their acquisition and the price realized in the sale is entered in the
books as a surplus, the error is the same. If the rise in the prices of
stocks and real estate is considered as a gain, the illusion is no less
manifest. What makes people believe that inflation results in general
4. W e are dealing here with conditions on an unhampered labor market. About
the argument advanced by Lord Keynes, see below, pp. 771 and 786-787.

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

547

prosperity is prccisely such illusory gains. They feel lucky and become openhanded in spending and enjoying life. They embellish
their homcs, they build new mansions and patronize the cntertainment business. In spending apparent gains, the fanciful result of false
reckoning, they are consun~ingcapital. I t does not matter who these
spenders are. T h e y may be businessmen or stock jobbers. Thcy may
bc wage earncrs whose demand for higher pay is satisfied by the
easygoing employers who think that they are getting richer from
day to day. They may be people supported by taxes which usually
absorb a great part of thc apparent gains.
Finally, with the progress of inflation more and morc peoplc become aware of the fall in purchasing power. For those not personally
engaged in busincss and not familiar with the conditions of the
stock market, thc main vehicle of saving is the accumulation of savings
deposits, the purchase of bonds and life insurance. All such savings
are prejudiccd by inflation. Thus saving is discouraged and extravagance sccms to he indicated. T h e ultimate reaction of the public, the
"flight into real values," is a desperate attempt to salvage some debris
from the ruinous breakdown. It is, viewed from the angle of capital
prescrvation, not a remedy, but merely a poor emergency measure.
I t can, at best. rescue a fraction of the saver's funds.
T h e main thesis of thc champions of inflationism and cxpansionism
is thus rather weak. I t may be admitted that in the past inflation often,
but not always, resuIted in forced saving and an increase in capital
available. However, this does not mean that it must produce the
same effects in the futurc, too. O n the contrary, one must rcalize
that under modcrn conditions the forces driving toward capital consumption are more likely to prevail under inflationary conditions
than those driving toward capital accumulation. A t any rate, the
final effect of such changes upon saving, capital. and the originary
rate of intcrcst depends upon the particulzr data of each instance.
The same is valid with the necessary changes with regard to the
analogous conscquences and effccts of' a deflationist or restrictionist
movement.

6. T h e Gross Market Ratc of Interest as-Affected by
Inflation and Credit Expansion
Whatcver the ultimate effects of an inflationary or deflationary
movement upon the height of the rate of originarv interest mav be,
therc is no correspondence between them and the'tcmporary alterations which a cash-induced change in the money relation can bring

54s

Human Action

about in the gross market rate of interest. If the inflow of money and
money-substitutes into the market system or the outflow from it
affects the loan market first, jt remporarily disarranges the congruity
between the gross market rates of intercst and the rate of originary
intercst. The market rate rises or drops on account of thc decrease or
increase in the amount of money offcred for lending, with no correlation t o changes in the originary rate of interest which in the later
course of events can possibly occur from thc changes in the money
relation. The market rate deviates from the height dctermincd by
that of the originary ratc of interest, and forces come into operation
which tend to adjust it anew to the ratio which corresponds to that
of originary interest. It may happen that in the period of time which
this adjustment requires, the height of originary intcrcst varies, and
this change can also be caused by the inflationary or deflationary process which brought about the deviation. Then the final ratc of originary interest determining the final marlcct rate toward which the
readjustment tends is not the same rate which prevaiIed on the eve
of the disarrangement. Such an occurrence may affect the data of the
process of adjustment, but it does not affect its essence.
T h e phenomenon to be dealt with is this: The rate of originary
interest is determined by the discount of future goods as against
present goods. It is essentially independent of the supply of money
and money-substitutes, notwithstanding the fact that changes in the
supply of money and money-substitutes can indirectly affect its
height. But the gross market rate of interest can be affected by changes
jn the money relation. A readjustment must take place. What is the
nature of the process which brings it about?
In this section we are concerned only with inflation and credit
expansion. For the sake of simplicity we assume that the whole additional amount of money and money-substitutes flows into the loan
market and reaches the rest of the market only via the loans granted.
This corresponds precisely to the conditions of an expansion of circulation credit.Wur scrutiny thus amounts to an analysis of the
process caused by credit expansion.
In dealing with this analysis, we must refer again to the price
premium. It has been mentioned already that at the very begillning
of a credit expansion no positive price premium arises. A price
premium cannot appear until the additional supply of money (in
the broader sense) has already begun to affect the prices of commodities and services. But as long as credit expansion goes on and
additional quantities of fiduciary media are hurled on the loan mars. About the "long-wave" fluctuations, see below, pp. 572-273.

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

549

ket, there continues a pressure upon the gross market rate of interest.
T h e gross market rate would have to rise on account of the positive
price premium which, with the progress of the expansionist process,
would have to rise continually. But as credit expansion goes on, the
gross market rate continues to lag behind the height at which it would
cover both originary interest plus the positive price premium.
It: is necessary to stress this point because it explodes the customary
methods according to which people distinguish benveen what they
consider low and high rates of interest. It is usual to take into account
merely the arithmetical height of the rates or the trend which appears
in their movement. Public opinion has definite ideas about a "normal"
rate, something between 3 and 5 per cent. When the market rate rises
above this hcight or when the market rates-without regard to their
arithmetical ratio-are rising above their previous height, people believe that they are right in speaking of high or rising interest rates.
As against these errors, it is necessary to emphasize that under the
conditions of a general rise in prices (drop in the monetary unit's
purchasing power) the gross market rate of interest can be considered
as unchanged w-ith regard to conditions of a period of a by and large
unchanging purchasing power only if it includes a by and large adequate positive price premium. In this sense, the German Reichsbank's
discount rate of go per cent was, in the fall of 1923, a low rate-indeed
a ridiculously low rate-as it considerably lagged behind the price
premium and did not leave anything for the other components of
the gross market rate of interest. Essentially the same phenomenon
manifests itseIf in every instance of a prolonged credit expansion.
Gross market rates of interest rise in the further course of every expansion, but they are nonetheless low as they do not correspond to
the hcight required by the expected further general rise in prices.
In analyzing the process of credit expansion, suppose we assume
that the economic system's process of adjustment to the market data
and of movement toward the establishment of final prices and interest
rates is disturbed by the appearance of a new datum, namely, an
additional quantity of fiduciary media offered on the loan market.
At the gross market rate which prevailed on the eve of this disturbance, all those who were ready to borrow money at this rate, due
allowance being made for the entrepreneurial component of each
instance, could borrow as much as they wanted. Additional loans can
be placed only at a lower gross market rate. It does not matter whether
this drop in the gross market rate expresses itself in an arithmetical
drop in the percentage stipulated in the loan contracts. It could happen that the nominal interest rates remain unchanged and that the

55 0
Human Action
expansion manifests itself in the fact that at these rates loans are
negotiated which would not have been made before on account of
the height of the entrepreneurial component included. Such an outcome too amounts to a drop in gross market rates and brings about the
same consequences.
A drop in the gross market rate of interest affects the entrepreneur's calculation concerning the chances of the profitability of
projects considered. Along with the prices of the material factors of
production, wage rates, and the anticipated future prices of the products, interest rates are items that enter into the planning businessman's calculation. The result of this calculation shows the businessman whether or not a definite project will pay. It shows him what
investments can bc made under the given state of the ratio in the
public's valuation of future goods as against present goods. It brings
his actions into agreement with this valuation. I t prevents him from
embarking upon projects the realization of which would be disapproved by the public because of the length of the waiting time they
require. It forces him to employ the available stock of capital goods
in such a way as to satisfy best the most urgent wants of the consumcrs.
nut now the drop in interest rates falsifies the businessman's calculation. Although the amount of capital goods available did not increase, the calculation employs figures which would be utilizable only
if such an increase had taken place. The result of such calculations is
thcrcfore misleading. They make some projects appear profitable and
realizable which a correct calculation, based on an interest rate not
manipulated by credit expansion, would have shown as unrealizable.
Entrepreneurs embark upon the execution of such projects. Business
activities are stimulated. A boom begins.
The additional demand on the part of the expanding entrepreneurs tends to raise the prices of producers' goods and wage rates.
With the rise in wage rates the prices of consumers' goods rise too.
Besides, [he enucpreneurs are contributing a share to the rise in h e
prices of consumers' goods as they too, deluded by the illusory gains
which their business accounts show, are ready to consume more. The
general upswing in prices spreads optimism. If only the prices of
producers' goods had risen and those of consumcrs' goods had not
been affected, the entrepreneurs would have become embarrassed.
They would have had doubts concerning the soundness of their
plans, as the rise in costs of production would have upset their calculations. But they are reassured by the fact that the demand for
consumers' goods is intensified and makes it possible to expand sales

Interest, Csedit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

55 I

in spite of rising prices, Thus they are confident that production will
pay, notwithstanding the higher costs it involves. They are resolved
to go on.
Of course, in order to continue production on the enlarged scale
brought about by the expansion of credit, all entrepreneurs, those
who did expand ;heir activities no less than those who produce only
within the limits in which they produced previously, need additional
funds as the costs of production are now higher. If the credit expansion
consists merely in a single, not repeated injection of a definite amount
of fiduciary media into the loan market and then ceases altogether, the
boom must very soon stop. The entrepreneurs cannot procure the
funds they need for the further conduct of their ventures. The gross
market rate of interest rises because the increased demand for loans
is not counterpoised by a corresponding increase in the quantity of
money available for lending. Commodity prices drop because some
entrepreneurs are selling inventories and others abstain from buying.
The size of business activities shrinks again. The boom ends because
the forces which brought it about are no longer in operation. The
additional quantity of circulation credit has exhausted its operation
upon prices and wage rates. Prices, wage rates, and the various individuals' cash hoIdings are adjusted to the new money relation; they
move toward the final state which corresponds to this honey relation,
without being disturbed by further injections of additional fiduciary
media. T h e rate of
interest which is coordinated to this new
structure of the market acts with fulI momentum upon the gross market rate of interest. The gross market rate is no longer subject to
disturbing influences exercised by cash-induced changes in the supply of money (in the broader sense).
The main deficiency of all attempts to explain the boom-viz., the
general tendency to expand production and of all prices to risewithout reference to changes in the supply of money or fiduciary
media, is to be seen in the fact that they disregard this circumstance.
A general rise in prices can only occur if there is either a drop in the
supply of all commodities or an increase in the supply of money (in
the broader sense). Let us, for the sake of arprnen;, admit for the
moment that the statements of these nonmonetary explanations of
the boom and the trade cycle are correct. Prices advance and business
activities expand although no increase in the supply of money has
occurred. Then very soon a tendency toward a drop in prices must
arise, the demand for loans must increase, the gross market rates of
interest must rise, and the short-lived boom comes to an end. In fact,
every nonmonetary trade-cycle doctrine tacitly assurnes-or ought

552

Human Action

logically to assume-that credit expansion is an attendant phenomenon
of the boon^.^ It cannot help admitting that in the absence of such a
crcdit expansion no boo~ncould cmcrge and that the increase in the
supply of money (in the broader sense) is a neccssary condition of
thc general upward movement of prices. 'Thus on close inspection the
statements of the nonmonetary explanations of cyclical fluctuations
shrink to the assertion that credit expansion, while an indispensable
requisite of the boom, is in irself alone not sufficient to bring i t about
and that some further conditions are required for its appearance.
Yet, even in this restricted sense, the tcachings of the nonmonetary
doctrines are vain. It is cvident that every expansion of crcdit must
bring about thc boom as dcscribed above. The boom-creating tendency of crcdit expansion can fail to come only if another factor
simultaneously counterbalances its growth. If, for instance, u+ile the
banks cxpand credit, it is expected that the government will completeIy tax away the businessmen's "exccss" profits or that it will
stop the further progrcss of crcdit expansion as soon as "pump-priming" will havc resulted in rising prices, no boom can develop. The
entrcprcneurs will abstain from expanding their venturcs with the
aid of the cheap credits offered by the banks because they cannot
expect to increase thcir gains. It is necessary to mention this fact because it explains the failure of the New Dcal's pump-priming measures
and other events of the 'thirties.
T h e boom can last only as long as the credit expansion progresses
at an ever-acccleratcd pace. The boom comes to an end as soon as
additional quantities of fiduciary media are no longer thrown upon
the loan markct. But it could i o t last forever even if inflation and
credit expansion were to go on cndlessly. It would then encounter
the barricrs which prevent the boundless expansion of circulation
crcdjr. It would lead to the crack-up boom and the breakdown of the
whole monetary system.
T h e essence of monetary theory is the cognition that cash-induced
changes in the money reiation affect the various prices, wage rates,
and intercst ratcs neither at the same time nor to the same extent. If
this unevenness were absent, money would bc ncutral; changes in the
moncy relation would not affect the structure of business, the size
and direction of production in the various branchcs of industry, consumption, and the wealth and income of the various strata of the population. Then the gross market rate of interest too would not be
affected+ither temporariIy or lastingly-by changes in the sphere
6. Cf. G. v. Haberler, Prosperity and Depression (new ed. League of Nations'
Report, Geneva, 1 9 3 9 ) ~
p. 7.

Interest, Credit Expansion, the T m d e Cycle

553

of money and circulation credit. T h e fact that such changes can
nlodifv the rate of originary interest is caused by the changes which
this unevenness brings about in the wealth and income of various individuals. The fact that, apart from these changes in the rate of
originary interest, the gross market rate is temporariIy affected is in
itself a manifestation of this unevenness. If the additional quantity of
money enters the economic system in such a way as to reach the loan
market only at a date at which it has already made commodity prices
and wage rates rise, these immediate temporary effects upon the
gross market rate of interest will be either slight or entirely absent.
T h e gross market rate of interest is the more violently affected, the
sooner the inflowing additional supply of money or fiduciary media
yeaches the loan market.
When under the conditions of credit expansion the whole amount
of the additionaI money substitutes is lent to businessmen, production is expanded. The entrepreneurs embark either upon lateral expansion of production (viz., the expansion of production without
lengthening the period of production in the individual industry) or
upon longitudinal expansion (viz., the lengthening of the period
of production). In either case, the additional plants require the investment of additional factors of production. But the amount of
capital goods available for investment has not increased. Neither does
credit expansion bring about a tendency toward a restriction of consumption. It is true, as has been pointed out above in dealing with
forced saving, that in the further progress of the expansion a part of
the population will be compelled to restrict its consuinption. But
it depends on the particular conditions of each instance of credit
expansion whether this forced saving of some groups of the people
will overcompensate the increase in consumption on the part of other
groups and will thus result in a net increase in the total amount of
saving in the whole market system. At any rate, the immediate consequence of credit expansion is a rise in cbnsumption on the part of
those wage earners whose wages have risen on account of the intensified demand for labor displayed by the expanding entrepreneurs.
I x t US for the sake of argument assume that the increased consumption of these wage earners favored by the inflation and the forced
saving of other groups prejudiced by the inflation are equal in amount
and that no change in the total amount of consumption has occurred.
Then the situation is this: Production has been altered in such a way
that the length of waiting time has been extended. But the demand
for consunlers' goods has not dropped so as to make the available
supplv last for a longer period. Of course, this fact results in a rise

5 54

Human Action

in the prices of consumers' goods and thus brings about the tendency
toward forced saving. However, this rise in the prices of consumers'
goods strengthens the tendency of business to expand. The entrcpreneurs draw from the fact that demand and prices are rising the
inference that it will pay to invest and to produce morc. They go on
and their intensified activities bring about a further rise in the prices
of producers' goods, in wage rates, and thereby again in the prices of
consumcrs' goods. Business b o o m as long as the banks are willing to
expand credit more and more.
On the eve of the credit expansion all thosc production processes
were in opcration which, under the given state of the market data,
were deemed profitablc. T h e system was moving toward a state in
which all those eager to earn wages would be enlployed and all
nonconvertible factors of production would be employed to the
extent that the demand of the consumers and the available supply
of nonspecific material factors and of labor would permit. A further
expansion of production is possible only if the amount of capital goods
is increased by additional saving, i.e., by surpluses produced and not
consumed. The characteristic mark of the credit-expansion boom
is that such additional capital goods have not been made available.
The capital goods required for the expansion of business activities
must be withdrawn from other lines of production.
We may calI p the total supply of capital goods available on the
eve of the credit expansion, and g the total amount of consumers'
goods which these p could, over a definite period of time, make
available for consumption without prejudice to further productior,.
Now thc entrepreneurs, enticed by credit expansion, embark upon
the production of an additional quantity of g3 of goods of the same
kind which they already used to produce, and of a quantity of g4
of goods of a kind not produced by then1 before. For the production
of g,a supply of p3 of capital goods is needed, and for the production
of g4a supply of p4. But as, according to our assumptions, the amount
of capita1 goods available has remained unaltered, the quantities f13
and p4 are lacking. I t is preciscly this fact that distinguishes the
"artificial" boom created by credit expansion from a "normal" expansion of production which only the addition of pa and p4 to p can
bring about.
Let us call r that amount of capital goods which, out of the gross
proceeds of production over a definite period of time, must be reinvested for the replacement of those parts of p used up in the process
of production. If r is employed for such replacement, one will be in
a position to turn out g again in the following period of time; if r

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle
j55
is withheld from this employment, p will be reduced by r, and p - r
will turn out in thc following period of time only g - a. W e may further assume that the economic system affected by credit expansion
is a progressing system. It produced "normally," as it were, in the
period of time preceding the credit expansion a surplus of capital
goods pl p2. If no credit expansion had intervened, p, would have
been employed for the production of an additional quantity of g.1
of the kind of goods produced previously, and p2 for the prdduction
of the supply g, of a kind of goods not produced before. The total
amount of capital goods which are at the entrepreneurs' disposal
p,.
and with regard to which they are frce to make plans is r pl
However, deluded by the cheap money, they act as if r p,
pz
p:) p4 were available and as if they were in a position to produce
not only g gl f g2, but beyond this also g~ G.They outbid
one another in competing for a share of a supply of capital goods
which is insufficient for the realization of their overambitious
plans.
The ensuing boom in the prices of producers' goods may at the
beginning outrun the rise in the prices of consumers' goods. I t may
thus bring about a tendency toward a fall in the originary rate of interest. But with the further progress of the expansionist movement
the rise in the prices of the consumers' goods will outstrip the rise
in the prices of producers' goods. The rise in wages and salaries and
the additional gains of the capitalists, entrepreneurs, and farmers,
although a grcat part of them is merely apparent, intensify the demand for consumers' goods. There is no need to enter into a scrutiny
of thc assertion of the advocates of credit expansion that the boom
can, by mcans of forced saving, really increase the total supply of
consumers' goods. At any rate, it is certain that the intensified demand for consumers' goods affects the market at a time when the
additional investments are not yet in a position to turn out their
products. The gulf between the prices of present goods and those
of future goods widens again. A tendency toward a rise in the rate
of originary interest is substituted for the tendency toward the opposite which may have come into operation at the earlier stages of the
expansion.
This tcndency toward a rise in the rate of originary interest and
the emergence of a positive price premium explain some characteristics of the boom. The banks are faced with an increased demand
for loans and advances on the part of business. The entrepreneurs are
prepared to borrow money at higher gross rates of interest. They go
on borrowing in spite of the fact that the banks charge more interest.

+

+ +

-+-

+ + -+

+

+

556

Human Action

Arithmetically, the gross rates of interest are rising above their height
on the eve of the expansion. Konetheless, they lag catallactically behind the height at which they would cover originary interest plus
entrepreneurial component and price premium. T h e banks believe
that they have done a11 that is needed to stop "unsound" speculation
when they lend on more onerous terms. They think that those critics
who blame them for fanning the flames of ;he boom-frenzy of the
market are wrong. 'They fail to see that in injecting more and more
fiduciary media into the market they are in fact kindling the boom.
It is the continuous increase in the supply of the fiduciary media that
produces, feeds, and accelerates the boom. T h e state of the gross
rnarltct rates of interest is only an outgrowth of this increase. If one
wants to know whether or not there is credit expansion, one must
look at the state of the supply of fiduciary media, not at the arithmetical state of interest rates.
It is customary to describe the boom as overinvestment. However,
additional investment is oniy possible to the extent that there is an
additional supply of capital goods available. As, apart from forced
saving, the boom itself does not result in a restriction but rather in
an increase in consumption, it does not procure more capital goods
for new investment. The essence of the credit-expansion boom is
not overinvestment, but invcstment in wrong lines, i.e., malinvestmcnt.
pa as if
T h e entrepreneurs employ the available supply of 1. -4- p,
PI+ p, f p, p4.
they were in a position to employ a supply of r
T h e y embark upon an expansion of invcstment on a scale for which
the capital goods available do not suffice. Their projects arc unrealizable on account of the insufficient supply of capital goods. They must
fail sooner or later. T h e unavoidable end of the credit expansion
rnalrcs the faults committed visible. There are plants which cannot
be utilized because the plants needed for the production of the
complementary factors of production are lacking; plants the products of which cannot be sold because the consumers arc more intent
upon purchasing other goods which, however, are not produced in
sufficient quantities; plants the construction of n~hichcannot be
continued and finished because it has become obvious that they will
not pay.
T h e erroneous belief that the essential feature of the boom is overinvestment and not malinvestment is due to the habit of judging conditions merely according to what is perceptible and tangible. The
observer notices only the malinvestments which are visible and fails
to recognize that these establishments are malinvestments only because of the fact that other plants-those required for the production

+

+

+

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

557

of the complementary factors of production and those required for
the production of consumers7 goods more urgently demanded by
the public-are lacking. TechnoIogical conditions rnakc it necessary to start an expansion of production by expanding first the size
of the plants producing the goods of those orders which are farthest
removed from the finished consumers' goods. In order to expand the
production of shoes, clothes, motorcars, furniture, houses, one must
begin with increasing the production of iron, steel, copper, and other
such goods. In employing the supply of r
PI p~ which would
suEce for the production of a g1+ g2 as if it were r pl p2 f
p3 p4 and would suffice for the production of a gl g, g, $g4,one must first engage in increasing the output of those products
and structures which for physical reasons are first required. The whole
entrepreneurial class is, as it were, jn the position of a master-builder
whose task it is to erect a building out of a limited supply of building materials. If this man overestimates the quantity of the available
supply, he drafts a plan for the execution of which the means at his
disposal are not sufficicnt. He ovcrsizcs the groundwork and the
foundations and only discovers later in the progress of the construction that he lacks the material needed for the completion of the
struccure. It is obvious that our master-builder's fault was not overinvestment, but an inappropriate employment of the means at his
disposal.
It is no less erroneous to believe that the events which resulted in
the crisis amounted to an undue conversion of "circulating" capital
into "fixed" capital. The individual entrepreneur, when faced with
the credit stringency of the crisis, is right in regretting that he has
expended too much ?or an expansion of his plant and for the purchase
of durable equipment; he would have been in a better situation if the
funds used for these purposes were still at his disposal for the current conduct of business. However, raw materiaIs, primary comrnoditics, half-finished manufactures and foodstuffs are not lacking
at the turning point at which the upswing turns into the depression.
O n the contrary, the crisis is precisely characterized by the fact that
these goods are offered in such quantities as to make their prices drop
sharply.
The foregoing statements explain why an expansion in the production facilities and the production of the heavy industries, and in
the production of durable producers7 goods, is the most conspicuous
mark of the boom. The editors of the financial and commercial
chronicles were right when-for more than a hundred years-they
looked upon production figures of these industries as well as of the

+

+

+ +
+ +
+ + +

558
Human Action
construction trades as an index of business fluctuations. They were
only mistaken in referring to an alleged overinvestment.
Of course, the boom affects also the consumers' goods industries.
They too invest more and expand their production capacity. However, the new plants and the new annexes added to the already existing
plants are not always those for the products of which the demand of
the public is most intense. They may we11 have agreed with the whole
plan aiming at the production of r $-g, .g2 $ g3 $- g4. The failure
of this oversized plan discloses their inappropriateness.
A sharp rise in commodity prices is not always an attending phenomenon of the boom. The increase of the quantity of fiduciary
media certainly always has the potential effect of making prices rise.
But it may happen that at the same time forces operating in the
opposite direction are strong enough to keep the rise in prices within
narrow limits or even to remove it entirely. The historical period in
which the smooth working of the market economy was again and
again interrupted through expansionist ventures was an epoch of
continuous economic progress. The steady advance in the accumulation of new capital made technological improvement possible. Output
per unit of input was increased and business fiIled the markets with
increasing quantities of cheap goods. If the synchronous increase in
the supply of money (in the broader sense) had been less plentiful
than it really was, a tendency toward a drop in the prices of all
commodities would have taken effect. As an actual historical event
credit expansion was always embedded in an environment in which
powerful factors were counteracting its tendency to raise prices.
As a rule the resultant of the clash of opposite forces was a preponderance of those producing a rise in prices. But thcrc were some
exceptional instances too in which the upward movement of prices
was only slight. The most remarkable example was provided by the
American boom of I~zG-29.
T h e essential features of a credit expansion are not affected by such
a particular constellation of the market data. What induces an entrepreneur to embark upon definite projects is neither high prices nor
low prices as such, but a discrepancy between the costs of production,
inclusive of interest on the capital required, and the anticipatcd prices
of the products. A lowering of the gross market rate of interest as
brought about by credit expansion always has the effect of making
some projects appear profitable which did not appear so before. It
pl pz as if it were r P I + pz
actuates business to employ r
p3 p,. It necessarily brings about a structure of investment and
production activities which is at variance with the real supply of

+

+

+ +

+

+

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

559

capital goods and must finally collapse. That sometimes the price
changes involved are laid against a background of a general tendency
toward a rise in purchasing power and do not convert this tendency into its ~nanifestopposite but only into something which may
bv and large be called price stability, modifies merely some accessories
o i the process.
However conditions may be, it is certain that no manipulations of
the banks can provide the economic system with capital goods. What
is needed for a sound expansion of production is additional capital
goods, not money or fiduciary media. The boom is built on the sands
of banknotes and deposits. It must collapse.
T h e breakdown appears as soon as the banks become frightened
by the accelerated pace of the boom and begin to abstain from further expansion of credit. T h e boom could continue only as long as
the banks were ready to grant freely all those credits which business
needed for the execition of its excessive projects, utterly disagreeing
with the r e d state of the supply of factors of production and the
valuations of the consumers. These illusory plans, suggested by the
falsification of business calculation as brought about b y the cheap
money policy, can be pushed forward only if new credits can be
obtained at gross rnarket rates which are artificially lowered below
the height they would reach at an unhampered loan market. I t is
this margin that gives them the deceptive appearance of profitability.
T h e change in the banks' conduct does not create the crisis. I t merely
makes visible the havoc spread by the faults which business has committed in the boom period.
Neither couId the boom last endlessly if the banks were to cling
stubbornly to their expansionist policics. Any attempt to substitute
additional fiduciary media for nonexisting capital goods (namely, the
qtmtities p, and p,i) is doomed to failure. If the credit expanu&n is
not stopped in timc, the boom turns into the crack-up boom; the
flight into real values begins, and the whole monetary system founders.
However, as a rule, the banks in the past have not pushed things to
extremes. They have become alarmed at a date when the final catastrophe was still far away.?
7. One sllould not fall prey to the illusion that these changes in the credit
policies of the banks were caused by the bankers' and the monetary authorities'
insight into the unavoidable consequences of a continued credit expansion. What
induced the turn in the banks' conduct was certain institutional conditions to be
dealt with further below, on pp. 790-791. Among the champions of economics
some private bankers were prominent; in particular, the elaboration of the early
form of the theory of business fluctuations, the Currency Theory, was for the
most part an achievement of British bankers. But the management of central
banks and the conduct of the various governments' monetary policies was as a

As soon as the afflux of additional fiduciary media comes to an
end, the airy castle of the boom collapses. The entrepreneurs must
restrict their activities because they lack the funds for their continuation on the exaggerated scale. Prices drop suddenly because
these distressed firms try to obtain cash by throwing inventories on
the market dirt cheap. Factories are closed, the continuation of construction projects in progress is halted, workers are discharged. As
on the one hand many firms badly need money in order to avoid
bankruptcy, and on the other hand no firm any longer enjoys confidence, the entrepreneurial component in the gross market rate of
interest jumps to an excessive height.
Accidental institutional and psychological circumstances generally
turn the outbreak of the crisis into a panic. The description of these
awful events can be left to the historians. It is not the task of catallactic
theory to depict in detail the calamities of panicky days and weeks
and to dwell upon their sometimes grotesque aspects. Economics is
not interested in what is accidental and conditioned by the individual
historical circumstances of each instance. Its aim is, on the contrary,
to distinguish what is essential and apodictically necessary from what
is merely adventitious. It is not interested in the psychological aspects
of the panic, but only in the fact that a credit-expansion boom must
unavoidably lead to a process which everyday speech calls the
depression. It must realize that the depression is in fact the process
of readjustment, of putting production activities anew in agreement
with the given state of the market data: the available supply of factors
of production, the valuations of the consumers, and particularly
also the state of originary interest as manifested in the public's valuations.
'These data, however, are no longer identical with those that prevailed on the eve of the expansionist process. A good many things
have changed. Forced saving and, to an even greater extent, regular
voluntary saving may have provided new capital goods which were
not totaiiy squandered rhrough maiinvestment and overconsumption as induced by the boom. Changes in the weaIth and income of
various individuals and groups of individuals have been brought about
by the unevenness inherent in every inflationary movement. Apart
from any causal relation to the credit expansion, population may
have changed with regard to figures and the characteristics of the
individuals comprising them; technological knowledge may have
advanced, demand for certain goods may have been altered. The
rule entrusted to men who did not find any fault with boundless credit expansion
and took offense at every criticism of their expansionist ventures.

Interest, Credit Expnnsion, the Trade Cycle

j6 I

final state to the establishnient of which the market tends is no longer
the same toward which it tended bcfore thc disturbances created
b y the credit expansion.
Some of the invcstnicnts niadc jn the boom period appear, whcn
appraised with the sober judgment of the rcadjmtment period, no
longer d i n ~ n c dby thc illusions of thc upswing, as absolutely hopeless failures. They must simply be abandoned hecausc thc current
rneans requircd for their further exploitation cannot be recovered
in selling their products; this "circulatiug" capital is rnorc urgently
11ecdcd in other branches of want-satisfaction; the proof is that it
can t)c employed in a more profitable way in other fields. Other
~nalinvestmcnts offer somewhat more favoratrlc chances. Tt is, of
course, true that one would not have embarked upon pntting capital
goods into thcm if one had correctly calculated. T h e inconvertible
invcstnlents niade on their behalf are certainly wastcd. But as they
are inconvertible, a fait accowzpli, they prescnt further action with
a ncw problem. If the proceeds which the sale of thcir products
promises are expected to exceed the costs of current operation, it is
profitable to carry on. Although the prices ~ . h i c hthe buving public
is prepared to allow for their products are not high cno@h to make
thc whole of thc inconvertible investmcnt profitable, they are sufficient
t o make a fraction, hou~cversmall, of the investment profitable. T h e
rest of the investment must be considercd as expenditure without
any offset. as capital squandercd and lost.
If one looks at this outcome from the point of view of the consumers, the rcsnIt is, of course, thc same. T h e consumers would be
[letter off if the iIlusions created by the casy-moncy policy had not
emiced the entrcprencurs to waste scarce capital goods by investing
them for the satisfaction of lcss urgent needs and withholding thcm
from lines of production in which they would have satisfied more
urgent nceds. But as things are now, they cannot but put up with
u hat is irrevocable. T h e y must for the tirnc being rcnouncc certain
amenities which thcy c;uld have enjoyed if the boom had not engendcred rnalinvcstment. But, on the othcr hand, thev can find partial
compensation in the fact that some enjoyments aie now available
to thcm which would have been beyond thcir reach if the smooth
course of cconomic activitics had n& been disturbed by the orgies
of the boom. It is slight compensation only, as their demand for those
other things which the); do not get because of inappropriate empIoynlent of capital goods is more intensc than their demand for these
"s~htitutcs," as it were. But it is the only choicc left to thern as
conditions and data are now.

j62

Human Action

The final outcome of the credit expansion is gencral impoverishment. Some people may have increased their wealth; they did not let
their reasoning be obfuscated by the mass hysteria, and took advantage
in time of the opportunities offered by the mobility of the individual
investor. Other individuals and groups of individuals may have been
favored, without any initiative of their own, by the mere time lag
between the rise in ;he prices of the goods they sell and those they
buy. But the immense majority must foot the bill for the malinvestments and the overco~~sumption
of the boom episode.
One must guard oneself against a misinterpretation of this term
impoverishment. It does not mean impoverishment whcn compared
with the conditions that prevailed on the eve of the credit expansion.
Whether or not an impoverishment in this sense takes place depends
on the particular data of each case; it cannot be predicated apodictically by catallactics. W h a t catallactics has in mind when asserting
that impoverishment is an unavoidablc outgrowth of credit expansion
is in~poverishmentas compared with the state of affairs which would
have developed in the absence of credit expansion and the boom. T h e
characteristic mark of cconomic history under capitalism is unceasing
economic progress, a steady increase in the quantity of capital goods
available, and a continuous trend toward an improvement in the
general standard of living. T h e pace of this progress is so rapid that,
in the course of a boom period, it may well outstrip the synchronous
losses caused by rnalinvestment and overconsumption. Then the econornic system as a whole is more prosperous at the end of the boom
than it was at its very beginning; it appears impoverished only when
compared with the potentialities which existed for a still bettcr state
of satisfaction.

The Alleged Absence of Depressions Under Totalitarian Management
Many socialist authors emphasize that the recurrence of economic crises
and business depressions is a phenon~enoninherent in the capitalist mode
of production. O n the other hand, a socialist system is safe against this evil.
As has already become obvious and will be shown later agaln, the cycl~cal
fluctuations of business are not an occurrence originating in the sphere of
the unhampered market, but a product of government interference with
business conditions designed to lower the rate of interest below the height
at which the free market would have fixed it.8 At this point we have only
to deal with the alleged stabiliv as secured by socialist planning.
It is essential to realize that what makes the economic crisis emerge is the
democratic process of the market. The consumers disapprove of the employment of the factors of production as effected by the entrepreneurs.
8. Cf. below, pp. 787-789.

Irztc~est, Credit Expmsion, the Tmde Cycle

563

They manifest their disapprobation by their conduct in buying and abstention from buying. T h e entrepreneurs, misled by the illusions of the artificially lowered gross market rate of interest, have failed to invest in those
lines in which the most urgent needs of the public would have been satisfied
in the best possible way. As soon as the credit expansion comes to an end,
these faults become manifest. T h e attitudes of the consumers force the
businessmen to adjust their activities anew to the best possible want-satisfaction. It is this process of liquidation of the faults committed in the boom
and of readjustment to the wishes of the consumers which is called the depression.
But in a sociaIist economy it is only the government's value judgments
that count, and the people are deprived of any means of making their own
value judgments prevail. A dictator does not bother about whether or not
the masses approve of his decision concerning how much to devote for
current consumption and how much for additional investment. If the
dictator invests more and thus curtails the means available for current consumption, the people must eat less and hold their tongues. N o crisis emerges
because the subjects have no opportunity to utter their dissatisfaction.
Where there is no business at all, business can be neither good nor bad.
There may be starvation and famine, but no depression in the sense in
which this term is used in dealing with the problems of a market economy.
Where the individuals are not free to choose, they cannot protest against
the methods applied by those directing the course of production activities.
It is no answer to this to object that public opinion in the capitalist countries favors the policy of cheap money. T h e masses are misled by the assertions of the pseudo-experts that cheap money can make them prosperous
at no expense whatever. They do not realize that investment can be expanded only to the extent that more capital is accumulated by saving. They
are deceived by the fairy tales of monetary cranks. Yet what counts in
reality is not fairy tales, but people's conduct. If men are not prepared to
save more by cutting down their current consumption, the means for a
substantial expansion of investment are lacking. l'hcse means cannot be
provided by printing banknotes and by credit on the bank books.
It is a common phenomenon that the individual in his capacity as a voter
virtually contradicts his conduct on the market. Thus, for instance, he may
vote for measures which will raise the price of one commodity or of all
commodities, while as a buyer he wants to see these prices low. Such conflicts arise out of ignorance and error. As human nature is, they can happen.
But in a social organization in which the individual is neither a voter nor a
buyer, or in which voting and buying are merely a sham, they are absent.

7. T h e Gross Market R a t e of Interest as Affected by
Deflation a n d Credit Contraction
W e assume that in the course of a deflationary process the whole
amount by which the supply of money (in the broader sense) is
reduced is taken from the loan market. Then the loan market and
the gross market rate of interest are affected at the very beginning of
the process, at a moment at which the prices of commodities and
services are not yet altered by the change going on in the money
relation. W e may, for instance, posit that a government aiming at
deflation floats a loan and destroys the paper money borrowed. Such
a procedure has been, in the last two hundred years, adopted again
and again. T h e idea was to raise, after a prolonged period of inflationary policy, the national monetary unit to its previous ~netallic
parity. Of course, in most cases the deflationary projects were soon
abandoned as their execution encountered increasing opposition and,
moreover, heaviIy burdened the treasury. O r we may assume that
the banks, frightened by their adverse experience in the crisis brought
about b y credit expansion, are intent upon increasing the reserves
held against their liabilities and therefore restrict the amount of circulation credit. A third possibility would be that the crisis has resulted in the bankruptcy of banks which granted circulation credit
and that the annihilation of the fiduciary media issued by these banks
reduces the supply of credit on the loan market.
In all these cases a temporary tendency toward a rise in the gross
market rate of interest ensues. Projects which would have appeared
profitable before appear so no longer. A tendency develops toward
a fall in the prices of factors of production and later toward a fall in
the prices of consumers' goods also. nusiness becomes slack. The
deadlock ceases only when prices and wage rates are by and large
adjusted to the new money relation. Then the loan market too adapts

------

-----

:&--I1 & - &LA
-La&-1 ...=I-:-- - - A
&L---I--&
-1 :-& - - - - &
l L 3 G l l LU LUG l l C W bLdLG U 1 I l l d l l 3 , 2lIICL L11G 8 1 U Z b I l J d l K G L I d L C U I 1IILClGbL

is no longer disarranged b y a shortage of money offered for advances.
Thus a cash-induced rise in the gross market rate of interest produces
a temporary stagnation of business. Deflation and credit contraction
no less than inflation and credit expansion are ele~nentsdisarranging
the smooth course of economic activities, and sources of disturbance.
However, it is a blunder t o look upon deflation and contraction as if
they were simply counterparts of inflation and expansion.
Expansion produces first the illusory appearance of prosperity. It
is extremely popular because it seems t o make the majority, even

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

565

everybody, more affluent. It has an enticing quality. A special moral
effort is needed to stop it. On the other hand, contraction immediately
produces conditions which everybody is ready to condemn as evil.
Its unpopularity is even greater than the popularity of expansion. It
creates violent opposition. Very soon the ~oliticalforces fighting it
become irresistible.
Fiat: money inflation and cheap loans to the government convey
additional funds to the treasury; deflation depletes the treasury's
vaults. Credit expansion is a boon for the banks, contraction is a
forfeiture. There is a temptation in inflation and expansion and a
repellent in deflation and contraction.
But the dissimilarity between the two opposite modes of money
and credit manipulation not only consists in the fact that while one of
them is popular the other is universally loathed. Deflation and contraction are less likely to spread havoc than inflation and expansion not
merely because they are only rarely resorted to. They are less disastrous also on account of their inherent effects. Expansion squanders
scarce factors of production by malinvestment and overconsumption.
If it once comes to an end, a tedious process of recovery is needed
in order to wipe out the impoverishment it has left behind. But
contraction produces neither malinvestment nor overconsumption.
T h e temporary restriction in business activities that it engenders may
by and large be offset by the drop in consumption on the part of the
discharged wage earners and the owners of the material factors of
production the sales of which drop. No protracted scars are left. When
the contraction comes to an end, the process of readjustment does not
need to make good for losses caused by capital consumption.
Deflation and credit restriction never played a noticeable role in
economic history. The outstanding examples were provided by Great
Britain's return, both after the wartime inflation of the Napoleonic
wars and after that of the first World War, to the prewar gold parity
of the sterling. In each case Parliament and Cabinet adopted the
deflationist policy without having weighed the pros and cons of the
two neth hods open for a return to the gold standard. In the second
decade of the nineteenth century they could be exonerated, as at that
time monetary theory had not yet 'clarified the problems involved.
More than a hundred years later it was simply a display of inexcusable
ignorance of economics as well as of monetary 11istorp.~
Ignorance manifests itself also in the confusion of deflation and
contraction and of the process of readjustment into which every
expansionist boom must lead. It depends on the institutiona1 structure
9. See below, p. 778.

566

Human Action

of thc credit system which created the boom whether or not the
crisis brings about a restriction in the amount of fiduciary media. Such
a restriction may occur svhen the crisis result5 in the bankruptcy of
banks granting circulation credit and the falling off is not counterpoised by a corresponding expansion on thc part of thc remaining
banks. But it is not necessarily an attendant phenomenon of the depression; it is beyond doubt that it has not appcared in the last eighty
years in Europe and that the extent to which it occurred in the United
States under the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 has been grossly exaggerated. T h e dearth of credit which marks thc crisis is caused not
by contraction but by the abstention from further credit expansion.
It hurts all enterprise;-not only those which are doomed at any ratc,
but no less those whose business is sound and could flourish if appropriate credit were available. As the outstanding debts are not paid
back, the banks lack the means to grant credits even to the most solid
firms. T h e crisis becomes general and forces all branches of business
and all firms to restrict the scopc of their activities. But there is no
means of avoiding these secondary consequences of the preceding
boom. They are inevitable.
As soon as the depression appears, there is a general lament over
deflation and people clamor for a continuation of the expansionist
policy. Now, it is truc that even with no restrictions in the supply
of money propcr and fiduciary media a\iailable, thc depression brings
about a cash-induced tendency toward an increase in the purchasing
power of the monetary unit. Every firm is intent upon increasing its
cash holdings, and these endeavors affect the ratio between the supply
of money (in the broader sense) and the demand for money (in the
broader sense) for cash holding. This may bc properly called deflation.
But it is a serious blunder to bclieve that the fall in commodity prices
is causccl by this striving after greater cash holding. The causation is
the other way around. Prices of the factors of production-both
material and human-have rcached an excessive height in the boom
period. They must come down before business can become profitabie
again. T h e entrepreneurs enlarge their cash holding because they
abstain from buying goods and hiring workcrs as long as the structurre
of priccs and wages is not adjusted to the real state of the market data.
Thus any attempt of the government or the labor unions to prevent
or to delay this adjustment merely prolongs the stagnation.
Even cconomists often failed to comprehend this concatcnation.
Thcy argued thus: T h e structure of prices as it developed in the boom
was a product of the expansionist pressure. If the further increase in

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

567

fiduciary media comes to an end, the upward movement of prices and
wages must stop. But, if there were no deflation, no drop in prices
and wage rates c o ~ d dresult.
This reasoning would be correct if the inflationary pressure had
not affected the loan market before it had exhausted its direct effects
upon commodity prices. Let us assume that a government of an
isolated country issues additional paper money in order to pay doles
to the citizens of moderate income. The rise in commodity prices
thus brought about would disarrange production; it would tend to
shift production from the consumers' goods regularly bought by the
nonsubsidized groups of the nation to those which the subsidized
groups are demanding. If the policy of subsidizing some groups in
this way is later abandoned, the prices of the goods demanded by
those formerly subsidized will drop and the prices of the goods demanded by those formerly nonsubsidized will rise more sharply. But
there will be no tendency of the monetary unit's purchasing power
to return to the state of the' pre-inflation period. T h e structure of
prices will be lastingly affected by the inflationary venture if the
government does not withdraw from the market the additional
quantity of paper money it has injected in the shape of subsidies.
Conditions are different under a credit expansion which first affects
the loan market. In this case the inflationary effects are multiplied by
the consequences of capital malinvestment and overconsumption.
Overbidding one another in the struggle for a greater share in the
limited supply of capital goods and labor, the entrepreneurs push
prices to a height at which they can remain only as long as the credit
expansion goes on at an accelerated pace. A sharp drop in the prices
of all comnlodities and services is unavoidable as soon as the further
inflow of additional fiduciary media stops.
While the boom is in progress, there prevails a general tendency to
buy as much as one can buy because a further rise in prices is anticipated. In the depression, on the other hand, people abstain from buying
because they expect that prices will continue to drop. The recovery
and the return to "normalcy" can only begin when prices and wage
rates are so low that a sufficient number of peoplc assume that they
will not drop still more. Therefore the only means to shorten the
period of bad business is to avoid any attempts to delay or to check the
fall in prices and wage rates.
Only when the recovery begins to take shape does the change in
the money relation, as effected by the increase in the quantity of
fiduciary media, begin to manifest itself in the structure of prices.

j68

Human Action

The Difference Between Credit Expansion and Simple Inflation
In dealing with the consequences of credit expansion we assumed that the
total amount of additional fiduciary media enters the market system via
the loan market as advances to business. All that has been predicated with
regard to the effects of credit expansion refers to this condition.
There are, however, instances in which the legal and technical methods
of credit expansion are used for a procedure catallactically utterly different from genuine credit expansion. Political and institutional convenience
sometimes makes it expedient for a government to take advantage of the
facilities of banking as a substitute for issuing government fiat money. T h e
treasury borrows from the bank, and the bank provides the funds needed
by issuing additional banknotes or crediting the government on a deposit
account. Legally the bank becomes the treasury's creditor. In fact the
whole transaction amounts to fiat money inflation. T h e additional fiduciary media enter the market by way of the treasury as payment for various
items of government expenditure. It is this additional government demand
that incites business to expand its activities. The issuance of these newly
created fiat money sums does not directly interfere with the gross market
rate of interest, whatever the rate of interest may be which the government
pays to the bank. They affect the loan market and the gross market rate of
interest, apart from the emergence of a positive price premium, only if a
part of them reaches the loan market at a time at which their effects upon
commodity prices and wage rates have not yet been consumrnatcd.
Such were, for example, the conditions in the United States in the second
World War. Apart from the credit expansion policy, which the Administration had already adopted before the outbreak of the war, the government borrowed heavily from the commercial banks. This was technically
credit expansion; essentially it was a substitute for the issuance of greenbacks. Even more complicated techniques were resorted to in many countries. Thus, for instance, the German Reich in the first World War sold
bonds to the public. T h e Reichsbank financed these purchases by lending
the greater part of the funds needed to the buyers against the same bonds
as collateral. Apart from the fraction which the buyer contributed from
his own funds, the roIe that the Bank and the public played in the whoIe
transaction was mereiy formal. Virtuaily, the adciitionai banknotes were
inconvertible paper money.
It is important to pay heed to these facts in order not to confuse the consequences of credit expansion proper and those of government-made fiat
money inflation.

8. The Monetary or Circulation Credit Theory of t h e

Trade Cycle
T h e theory of the cyclical fluctuations of business as elaborated b y

the British Currency School was in t w o respects unsatisfactory.

Inte~est, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

569

First it faiIed to recognize that circulation credit can be granted not
only by the issue of banlmotcs in excess of the banks' holding of cash
reserves, but also by creating bank deposits subject t o check in excess
of such reserves (checkbook money, deposit currency). Consequently
it did not realize that deposits payable on demand can also be used as
a device of credit expansion. This error is of little weight, as it can
be easily amended. I t is enough to stress the point thxt all that rcfcrs
to credit expansion is valid for all varieties of credit expansion no
matter whether the additional fiduciary media are banknotes or deposits. However, the teachings of the Currency SchooI inspired British
legislation designed to prevent the rcturn of credit-expansion booms
and their necessary consequence, deprcssions, at a time when this
fundamental dcfect was not yet unmasked. Peel's Act of 184.4 and
its imitations in other countries did not attain the ends sought, and
this failure shook the prestige of the Currency School. T h e Banking
School triumphed undeservedly.
T h e second shortcoming of the Currency Theory was more momentous. It rcstricted its reasoning to the problem of the external
drain. It dealt only with a particular case, viz., credit expansion in one
country only whiIe there is either no credit expansion or only credit
expansion to a smaller extent in other areas. This was, by and large,
sufficient to explain the British crisis of the first part of the nineteenth
century. But it touched only the surface of the problem. T h e essential
question was not raised at all. Nothing was done t o clarify the consequences of a general expansion of credit not confined to a number
of banks with a restricted clientele. T h c reciprocal relations between
the supply of moncy (in the broader sense) and the rate of interest
werc not analyzed. The multifarious projects to lower or to abolish
interest altogether by means of a banking reform were haughtily
derided as quackery, but not critically dissected and refuted. T h e
nai've presumption of money's neutrality was tacitly ratified. Thus
a free hand was left to all futile attempts to interpret crises and business fluctuations by means of the theory of direct exchange. hiany
decades passed before the spell was broken.
T h e hindrance that the monctary or circulation credit theory had
t o ovcrcome was not merely theoietical crror but also political bias.
Public opinion is prone to see in interest nothing but a mcrely institutional obstacle to the expansion of production. It does not reaIize that
the discount of future goods as against present goods is a necessary
and eternal category of human action and cannot be abolished by bank
manipulation. In tile eyes of cranks and demagogues, interest is a
product of the sinister machinations of rugged exploiters. T h e age-old

570
Human Action
disapprobation of interest has been fully revived by modern interventionism. It clings to the dogma that it is one of the foremost duties
of good government to lower the rate of interest as far as possible or
to abolish it altogether. A11 present-day governments are fanatically
committed to an easy money policy. As has been mentioned already,
the British Government has asserted that credit expansion has performed "the miracle . . . of turning a stone into bread." loA Chairman of the Fcderal Reserve Bank of New York has declared that
"final freedom from the domestic money market exists for every
sovereign national state where there exists an institution which functions in the manner of a modern central bank, and whose currency is
not convertible into gold or into some other commodity." Many
governments, universities, and institutes of economic research lavishly
subsidize publications whose main purpose is to praise the blessings
of unbridled credit expansion and to slander all opponents as illintentioncd advocates of the selfish interests of usurers.
T h e wavelike movement affecting the economic system, the recurrence of periods of boom which are followed by periods of depression, is the unavoidable outcome of the attempts, repeated again
and agin, to lower the gross market rate of interest by means of credit
expansion. There is no means of avoiding the finaI colfapse of a boom
brought about by credit expansion. The alternative is only whether
the crisis should come sooner as the result of a voluntary abandonment
of further credit expansion, or later as a final and total catastrophe of
the currency system involved.
T h e only objection ever raised against the circulation credit theory
is lame indeed. It has been asserted that the lowering of t+ gross
market rate of interest below the height it would have reached on an
unhampered loan market may appear not as the outcome of an intentional policy on the part of the banks or the monetary authorities
but as the unintentional effect of their conservatism. Faced with a
situation which would, when left alone, result in a raise in the market
rate, the banks refrain from altering the interest they charge on advances and thus willy-nilly tumble into expansion.12 These assertions
are unwarranted. But if we are prepared to admit their correctness
for the sake of argument, they do not affect at all the essence of the
monetary explanation of the trade cycle. It is of no concern what the
particuIar conditions are that induce the banks to expand credit and
10.See above, p. 467.
1 1 . Beardsley Ruml, "Taxes for Revenue Are Obsolete," American Affairs,
VIII (1946), 35-36.
12. Machlup ( T h e Stock Market, Credit and Capital Formation, p. 248) calls
this conduct of the banks "passive inflationism."

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

571

to underbid the gross market rate of interest which the unhampered
market would have determined. What counts is solely that the banks
and the monetary authorities are guided by the idea that the height
of interest rates as the free loan market determines it is an evil, that it
is the objective of a good economic poIicy to lower it, and that credit
expansion is an appropriate means of achieving this end without harm
to anybody but parasitic moneylenders. I t is this infatuation that
causes them to embark upon ventures which must finally bring about
the slump.
If one takes these facts into consideration one could be tempted
to abstain from any discussion of the problems involved in the frame
of the theory of the pure market economy and to relegate it to the
analysis of interventionism, the interference of government with the
market phenomena. I t is beyond doubt that credit expansion is one of
the primary issues of interventionism. Nevertheless the right place for
the analysis of the problems involved is not in the theory of intcrventionism but in that of the pure market economy. For the problem
w e have to deal with is essentially the relation between the supply of
money and the rate of interest, a problcm of which the consequences
of credit expansion are only a particular instance.
Everything that has been asserted with regard to credit expansion is
equally valid with regard to the effects of any increase in the supply
of money proper as far as this additional supply reaches the loan
rnarltet at an early stage of its inflow into the market system. If the
additional quantity of money increases the quantity of money offered
for loans at a time when commodity prices and wage rates have not
yet been completely adjusted to the change in the money relation,
the effects are no different from those of a credit expansion. In analyzing the problem of credit expansion, c~tallacticscompletes thc structure of the theory of money and of interest. I t implicitly demolishes
the age-old errors concerning interest and explodes the fantastic plans
to "abolish" interest by means of monetary or credit reform.
what differentiates credit expansion from an increase in the suppIy
of money as it can appear in an economy employing only commodity
money and no fiduciary media at a11 is conditioned by divergences
in the quantity of the increase and in the temporal sequence of its
effects on the various parts of the market. Even a rapid increase in the
production of the precious metals can never have the range which
credit expansion can attain. The gold standard was an efficacious check
upon credit expansion, as it forced the banks not to exceed certain
limits in their expansionist ventures.lThe gold standard's own infla13. Cf. below, p. 472.

572

Human Action

tionary potentialities were kept within limits by the vicissitudes of
gold mining. Moreover, only a part of the additional gold immediately
increased the supply offered on the loan market. The greater part
acted first upon commodity prices and wage rates and affected the
loan market only at a later stage of the inflationary process.
However, the continuous increase in the quantity of commodity
money exercised a steady expansionist pressure on the loan market.
The gross market rate of interest was, in the course of the last centuries, continually subject to the impact of an inflow of additional
money into the loan market. Of course, this pressure for the last
hundred and fifty years in the Anglo-Saxon countries and for the last
hundred years in the co~~ntries
of the European continent, was far
exceeded by the effects of the synchronous development of circulation credit as granted by the banks apart from their-from time to
time reiterated-straightforward endeavors to lower the gross market
rate of interest by an intensified expansion of credit. Thus three
tendencies toward a lowering of the gross market rate of interest were
operating at the same time and strengthening one another. One was
the outgrowth of the steady increase in the quantity of commodity
money, the second the outgrowth of a spontaneous development of
fiduciary media in banking operations, the third the fruit of intentional anti-interest policies sponsored by the authorities and approved
by public opinion. It is, of course, impossible to ascertain in a quantitative way the effect of their joint operation and the contribution of
each of them; an answer to such a question can only be provided by
historical understanding.
What catallactic reasoning can show us is merely that a slight although continuous pressure on the gross market rate of interest as
originating from a continuous increase in the quantity of gold, and also
from a slight increase in the quantity of fiduciary media, which is not
overdone and intensified by purposeful easy money policy, can be
counterpoised by the forces of readjustment and accommodation inherent in the market economy. The adaptability of business not purposely sabotaged by forces extraneous to the market is powerful
enough to offset the effects which such slight disturbances of the
loan market can possibly bring about.
Statisticians have tried to investigate the long- waves of business
fluctuations with statistical methods. Such attempts are futile. The
history of modern capitalism is a record of steady economic progress,
again and again interrupted by feverish booms and their aftermath,
depressions. It is generally possible to discern statistically these re-

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

573

curring oscilIations from the general trend toward an increase in the
amount of capital invested and the quantity of products turned out.
It is impossible to discover any rhythmical fluctuation in the general
trcnd itself.

9. T h e Market Economy as Affected b y the Recurrence
of the T r a d e Cycle
The popularity of inflation and credit expansion, the ultimate source
of the repeated attempts to render people prosperous by credit expansion, and thus the cause of the cyclical fluctuations of business, manifests itself clearly in the customary terminology. T h e boom is called
good business, prosperity, and upswing. Its unavoidable aftermath, the
readjustment of conditions to the real data of the market, is called
crisis, slump, bad business, depression. People rebel against the insight
that the disturbing element is to be seen in the malinvestment and the
overconsumption of the boom period and that such an artificially
induccd boom is doomed. They are looking for the philosophers'
stone to make it last.
I t has been pointed out already in what respect we are free to call
an improvement in the quality and an increase in the quantity of
products economic progress. If we apply this yardstick to the various
phases of the cyclical fluctuations of business, we must call the boom
retrogression and the depression progress. The boom squanders
through malinvestment scarce factors of production and reduces the
stock available through overconsumption; its alleged blessings are
paid for by impoverishment. T h e depression, on the other hand, is
the way back to a state of affairs in which all factors of production
are em$oyed for the best possible satisfaction of the most urgent
needs of the consumers.
Desperate attempts have been made to find in the boom some positive contribution to economic progress. Stress has been laid upon the
role forced saving plays in fostering capital accumulation. The argument is vain. It has been shown already that it is very questionable
whether forced saving can ever achieve more than to counterbalance
a part of the capital consumption generated by the boom. If those
praising the allegedly beneficial effects of forced saving were consistent, they would advocate a fiscal system subsidizing the rich out
of taxes cbllected from peoplc with modest incomes. The forced
saving achieved by this method would provide a net increase in the
amount of capital available without simultaneously bringing about
capital consumption of a much greater size.

5 74

Human Action

Advocates of credit expansion have furthermore emphasized that
some of the malinvestments made in the boom later become profitable.
These investments, they say, were made too early, i.e., at a date when
[he state of the supply of capital goods and the valuations of the consumers did not yet allow their construction. However, the havoc
caused was not too bad, as these projects would have been executed
anyway at a later date. I t may be admitted that this description is
adequate with regard to some instances of rnalinvestment induced
by a boom. But nobody w-ould dare to assert that the statement is
correct with regard to all projects whose execution has been encouraged by the illusions created by the easy money policy. However
this may be, it cannot influence the consequences of the boom and
cannot undo or deaden the ensuing depression. T h e effects of the
rnalinvestment appear without regard to whether or not these malinvestments will appear as sound investments at a later time under
changed conditions. When, in 1845, a railroad was constructed in
England which would not have been constructed in the absence of
credit expansion, conditions in the following years were not affected
by the prospect that in 1870 or 1880 the capital goods required for
its construction would be available. 'The gain which later resulted
from the fact that the railroad concerned did not have to be built by
a frcsh expenditure of capital and labor, was in 1847 no compensation
for the losses incurred by its premature construction.
'She boom produces impoverishment. But still more disastrous are
its moral ravages. I t makes people despondent and dispirited. The
more optimistic they were under the illusory prosperity of the boom,
the grcater is their despair and their feeling of frustration. The individual is always ready to ascribe his good luck to his own efficicncy
and to take it as a well-deserved reward for his talent, application,
and probity. But reverses of fortune he always charges to other
people, and most of all to the absurdity of social and poIitica1 institutions. H e does not blame the authorities for having fostered the boom.
H e reviles them for the necessary collapse. In the opinion of the
public, more inflation and more credit expansion are the only remedy
against the evils which inflation and credit expansion have brought
about.
Here, they say, are plants and farms whose capacity to produce is
either not used at all or not to their full extent. Here are piles of unsalable commodities and hosts of unemployed workers. But here are
also masses of people who would be lucky if they only could satisfy
their wants more amply. All that is lacking is credit. Additional credit
would enable the entrepreneurs to resume or to expand production.

Inte~est, Credit E x p m i o n , the Trade Cycle

575

T h e unemployed would find jobs again and could buy the products.
This reasoning seems pIausible. Nonetheless it is utterly wrong.
If commodities cannot be sold and worlters cannot find jobs, the
reason can only be that the prices and wages asked are too high. H e
who wants to sell his inventories or his capacity to work must reduce
his demand until he finds a buyer. Such is the law of the market. Such
is the device by means of which the market directs every individual's
activities into those lines in which they can best contributc to the
satisfaction of the wants of the consumers. T h e malinvestments of thc
boom havc misplaced inconvertible factors of production in some lines
at the expense of other lines in which they were more urgently needed.
Thcrc is disproportion in the allocation of nonconvertible factors to
thc various branches of industry. This disproportion can be remedied
only by the accun~ulationof new capital and its enlployment in those
branches in which it is most urgently required. This is a slow process.
While it is in progress, it is impossible to utilize fully the productive
capacity of some plants for which the complcmentary production
facilities are lacking.
It is vain to object that there is also unused capacity of plants turning out goods whose specific character is low. T h e slack in the sale of
these goods, it is said, cannot be explained by disproportionality in
the capital equipment of various branches; they can be used and are
needed for many different employments. This too is an error. If steel
and iron works, copper mines, and sawmills cannot be operated to their
full capacity, the reason can only be that there arc not enough buyers
on the market ready to purchase their whole output at prices which
cover the costs of their current exploitation. As the variable costs can
merely consist in prices of other products and in wages, and as the
same is valid with rcgard to the prices of these other products, this always means that wage rates arc too high to provide all those eager to
work with jobs and to employ thc inconvertible equipment to the full
limits drawn by the requirement that nonspecific capital goods and
labor should not be withdrawn from employments in which they fill
more urgent needs.
Out of the collapse of the boom there is only one way back to a
state of affairs in which progressive accumulation of capital safeguards
a steady improvement of material well-being: ncw saving must accumulate the capital goods needed for a harmonious equipment of
all branches of production with the capital required. One must provide
the capita1 goods lacking in those branches which were unduly
neglected in the boom. Wage rates must drop; people must restrict
their consumption temporarily untiI the capital wasted by malinvest-

576

Human Action

ment is restored. Those who dislike these hardships of the readjustment period must abstain in time from credit expansion.
There is no use in interfering by means of a new credit expansion
with the process of readjustment. This would at best only interrupt,
disturb, and prolong the curative process of the depression, if not
bring about a new boom with all its inevitable consequences.
T h e process of readjustment, even in the absence of any new
credit expansion, is delayed b y the psvchological effects of disappointment and frustration. People are ;low t o free themselves from
the self-deception of delusive prosperity. Businessmen try to continue
unprofitable projects; they shut their eyes t o an insight that hurts. T h e
workers delay reducing their claims to the level required b y the state
of the market; they want, if possible, t o avoid lowcring thcir standard
of living and changing their occupation and their dwelling place.
People are the more discouraged the greater their optimism was in
the days of the upswing. T h e y have for the moment lost selfconfidence and the spirit of enterprise to such an extent that they even
fail t o take advantage of good opportunities. But the worst is that
people are incorrigible. After a few years they embark aneu7 upon
credit expansion, and the old story repeats itseif.

T h e Role Pla.yed by U?2ewzploycd Fxctors of Production
in the First Stages of n B o o m
There are in the changing economy always unsold inventories (exceeding those quantities which for technical rcasons must be lrcpt in stock),
unemployed workers, and unused capacity of inconvertible production
facilities. The system is moving toward a state in which there wilI be
neither unemployed workers nor surpIus inventories.14 But as the appearance of new data continualIy diverts the course toward a new goal, tht.
conditions of the evenly rotating economy are never realized.
The presencc of unuscd capacity of inconvertible investnlents is an outgrowth of errors committed in the past. Thc assumptions made by the investors were, as later events proved, not correct; thc market asks more
intensively for other goods than for those which these plants can turn out.
The piIing up of excessivc inventories and the catallactic uncmployment
of workers are speculative. The owner of the stock refuses to seIl at the
market price because he hopcs to obtain a higher price a t a later date. The
unemployed worker refuses to change his occupation or his residence or
to content himself with lower pay because he hopes to obtain at a later date
a job with higher pay in the place of his rcsidence and in thc branch of business he likes best. Both hesitate to adjust their claims to the present situation
14. Tn the evenly rotating economy also there may bc unused capacity of inconvertible equipment. Its nonutilization does not disturb the equilibrium any
more than the fallowness of submarginal soil.

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

577

of the market because they wait for a change in the data which will alter
conditions to their advantage. Their hesitation is one of the reasons why
the system has not reached the state of the evenly rotating economy.
The advocates of credit expansion argue that what is wanted is more
fiduciary media. Then the plants will work at full capacity, the inventories
will be sold at prices their owners consider satisfactory, and the unemployed will get jobs at wages they consider satisfactory. This very popular
doctrine implies that the rise in prices, brought about by the additional
fiduciary ~nedia,would at the same time and to the same extent affect all
other commodities and services, while the owners of the excessive inventories and the unemployed workers would content themselves with those
nominal prices and wages they are asking-in vain, of course-today. For
if this were to happen, the real prices and the real wage rates obtained by
these owners of unsold inventories and unemployed workers would drop
-in proportion to the prices of other commodities and services-to the
height to which they must drop in order to find buyers and employers.
The course of the boom is not substantially affected by the fact that at
its eve there are unused capacity, unsold surplus inventories, and unemployed workers. Let us assume that there are unused facilities for the mining of copper, unsold piles of copper, and unemployed workers of copper
mines. T h e price of copper is at a level at which mining does not pay for
some mines; their workers are discharged; there are speculators who abstain from seiling their stocks. What is needed in order to make these mines
profitable again, to give jobs to the unemployed, and to sell the piles without forcing prices down below costs of production, is an increment p in the
amount of capital goods available large enough to make possible such an
increase in investment and in the size of production and consumption that
an adequate rise in the demand for copper ensues. If, however, this increment p does not appear and the entrepreneurs, deceived by the credit expansion, nevertheless act as if p had really been available, conditions on the
copper market, while the boom lasts, are as if p had really been added to
the amount of capital goods available. But everything that has been predicated about the inevitable consequences of credit expansion fits this case
too. The only difference is that, as far as copper is concerned, the inappropriate expansion of production need not be achieved by the withdrawal
of cd+d and :&or from emp:oymmts ;[I ivhidi they would better have
filled the wants of the consumers. As far as copper is concerned, the new
boom encounters a piece of malinvestment of capital and malemployment
of labor already effected in a previous boom, which the process of readjustment has not yet absorbed.
Thus it becomes obvious how vain it is to justify a new credit expansion
b y referring to unused capacity, unsoId-or, as people say incorrectly,
"unsaleab1e"-stocks, and unemployed workers. T h e beginning of a new
credit expansion runs across remainders of preceding malinvestment and
malemploymcnt, not yet obliterated in the course of the readjustment
process, and seemingly remedies the faults involved. In fact, however, this

578

Human Action

is merely an interruption of the process of readjustment and of the return
to sound conditions.15 T h e existence of unuscd capacity and unemployment is not a valid argument against the correctness of the circulation
credit theory. The belief of the advocates of credit expansion and inflation
that abstention from further credit expansion and inflation would perpetuate the depression is utterly false. T h e remedies these authors suggest
would not make the boom last forever. They would merely upset the
process of recovery.

T h e Fallacies of t h e Nonmonetary Explanations of the Trade Cycle
In dealing with the futile attempts to explain the cyclical fluctuations of
business by a nonmonetary doctrine, one point must first of all be stressed
which has hitherto been unduly neglected.
There were schools of thought for whom interest was merely a price
paid for obtaining the disposition of a quantity of money or money substitutes. From this belief they quite logically drew the inference that
abolishing the scarcity of money and money-substitutes would abolish
interest altogether and result in the gratuitousness of credit. If, however,
one does not endorse this view and comprehends the nature of originary
interest, a problem presents itself the treatment of which one must not
evade. An additional supply of credit, brought about by an increase in the
quantity of money or fiduciary media, has certainly the power to Iower the
gross market rate of interest. If interest is not merely a monetary phenornenon and consequently cannot be lastingly lowered or brushed away by
any increase, however large, in the supply of money and fiduciary media,
it devolves upon economics to show how the height of the rate of interest
conforming to the state of the market's nonmonetary data reestablishes
itself. It must explain what kind of process removes the cash-induced deviation of the market rate from that state which is consonant with the ratio
in people's valuation of present and future goods. If economics were at a
loss t o achieve this, it would implicitly admit that interest is a monetary
phenomenon and could even disappear completely in the course of changes
in the money relation.
For the nonmonetary explanations of the trade cycle the experience that
there are recurrent depressions is the primary thing. Their champions first
do not see in their scheme of the sequence of economic events any clue
which could suggest a satisfactory interpretation of these enigmatic disorders. They desperately search for a makeshift in order to patch it onto
their teachings as an alleged cycle theory.
T h e case is different with the monetary or circulation credit theory.
Modern monetary theory has finally cleared away all notions of an aIIeged
neutrality of money. It has proved irrefutably that there are in the market
economy factors operating about which a doctrine ignorant of the driving
force of money has nothing to say. The catallactic system that involves the
15. Hayek (Prices and Production [zd ed. London, 19351, pp. 96ff.) reaches
the same conclusion by way of a somewhat different chain of reasoning.

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

579

ltnowledge of money's non-neutrality and driving force presses the questions of how changes in the money relation affect the rate of interest first
in the short run and later in the long run. The system would be defective
if i t could not answer these questions. It would be contradictory if it were
to provide an answer which would not simultaneousIy explain the cyclical
Auctuations of trade. Even if there had never been such things as fiduciary
media and circulation credit, modern catallactics would have been forced
t o raise the problem concerning the relations between changes in the
money relation and the rate of interest.
It has been mentioned already that every nonmonetary explanation of
the cycle is bound to admit that an increase in the quantity of money or
fiduciary media is an indispensable condition of the emergencc of a boom.
It is obvious that a general tendency of prices to rise which is not caused by
a general drop in production and in the supply of comrnoditics offered for
sale. cannot appear if the supply of money (in the broader sense) has not
increased. Now we can see that those fighting the monetary explanation
are also forced to resort to the theory they slander for a second reason.
For this theory alone answers the question of how an inflow of additional
money and fiduciary media affects the loan market and the market rate of
interest. Only those for whom interest is rnereIy the outgrowth of an institutionally conditioned scarcity of money can dispcnsc with an implicit
acknowledgment of the circulation credit theory of the cycle. This explains
why no critic has ever advanced any tenable objection against this theory.
The fanaticism with which the supporters of all these nonmonetary
doctrines refuse to acknowledge their errors is, of coursc, a display of
political bias. The Marxians have inaugurated the usage of interpreting the
commercial crisis as an inherent evil of capitalism, as the necessary outgrowth of its "anarchy" of production.1° The non-Marxian socialists and
the interventionists are no less anxious to denlonstrate that the market
economy cannot avoid the return of depressions. They are the more eager
t o assail the monetary theory as currency and credit manipulation is today
the main instrument by means of which the anticapitalist governments are
intent upon cstablishing government omnipotence.l7
The attempts to connect business depressions with cosmic influences,
the most remarkable of which was William Stanley Jevons' sunspot theory,
failed utterly. T h e market economy has succeeded in a fairIy satisfactory
way in adjusting production and marketing to all the natural conditions of
human life and its environment. It is quite arbitrary to assume that there is
just one natural fact-namely, allegedly rhythmic harvest variationswith which the market economy does not know how to cope. W h y do cntrepreneurs fail t o recognize the fact of crop fluctuations and to adjust
business activities in such a way as to discount their disastrous effects upon
their plans?
16. About the fundamental fault of the Marxian and all other underconsumption theories, cf. above, p. 298.
17. About these currency and credit manipulations, cf. below, pp. 774-799.

j80

Human Action

Guided by the Marxian slogan "anarchy of production," the present-day
nonmonetary cycle doctrines explain the cyclical fluctuations of trade in
terms of a tendency, allegedly inherent in the capitalist economy, to develop disproportionality in the size of investments ~ n a d ein various branches
of industry. Yet even these disproportionality doctrines do not contest the
fact that every businessman is eager to avoid such mistakes, which must
bring him serious financial losses. The essence of the activities of entrepreneurs and capitalists is precisely not to embark upon projects which
they consider unprofitable. If one assumes that there prevails a tendency
for businessmen to fail in these endeavors, one implies that all businessmen
are short-sighted. They are too dull to avoid certain pitfalls, and thus
blunder again and again in their conduct of affairs. The whole of society
has to foot the bill for the shortcomings of the thick-headed speculators,
promoters, and entrepreneurs.
Now it is obvious that men are fallible, and businessmen are certainly not
free from this human weakness. But one should not forget that on the
market a process of selection is in continual operation. There prevails an
unceasing tendency to weed out the less efficient entrepreneurs, that is,
those who fail in their endeavors to anticipate correctly the future demands of the consumers. If one group of entrepreneurs produces commodities in excess of the demand of the consumers and consequently
cannot sell these goods at remunerative prices and suffers losses, other
groups who produce those things for which the public scrambles make all
the greater profits. Some sectors of business are distressed while others
thrive. hTogeneral depression of trade can emerge.
But the proponents of the doctrines we have to deal with arguc differently. They assume that not only the whole entrepreneuriaI class but all of
the people are struck with blindness. As the entrepreneurial class is not a
closed social order to which access is denied to outsiders, as every enterprising man is virtually in a position to challenge those who already belong
to the class of entrepreneurs. as the history of capitalism provides innumerable examples of penniless newcomers who brilliantly succeeded in embarking upon the production of those goods which according to their own
judgment were fitted to satisfy the most urgent needs of consumers, the
assumption that all entrepreneurs regularly fall prey to certain errors
tacitly implies that all practical Inen lack intelligence. It implies that nobody who is engaged in business and nobody who considers engaging in
business if some opportunity is offered to him by the shortcomings of those
already engaged in it, is shrewd enough to understand the real state of the
market. But on the other hand the theorists, who are not themselves active
in the conduct of affairs and merely phiIosophize about other people's
actions, consider themselves smart enough to discover the fallacies leading
astray those doing business. These omniscient professors are never deluded
by the errors which cloud the judgment of everyone else. They know
precisely what is wrong with private enterprise. Their claims ro be in-

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

581

vested with dictatorial powers to control business are therefore fully
justified.
The most amazing thing about these doctrines is that they furthermore
imply that businessmen, in their littleness of mind, obstinately cling to
their erroneous procedures in spite of the fact that the scholars have long
since unmasked their faults. Although every textbook explodes them, the
businessmen cannot help repeating them. There is manifestly no means to
prevent the recurrence of economic depression other than to entrust-in
accordance with Plato's utopian ideas-supreme power t o the philosophers.
Let us examine briefly the two most popular varieties of these disproportionality doctrines.
There is first the durable goods doctrine. These goods retain their serviceableness for some time. As long as their life period lasts, the buyer who
has acquired a piece abstains from replacing it by the purchase of a new
one. Thus, once all people have made their purchases, the demand for new
products dwindles. Business becomes bad. A revival is possible only when,
after the lapse of some time, the old houses, cars, refrigerators, and the like
are worn out, and their owners must buy new ones.
However, businessmen are as a rule more provident than this doctrine
assumes. They are intent upon adjusting the size of their production to the
anticipated size of consumers' demand. The bakers take account of the fact
that every day a housewife needs a new loaf of bread, and the manufacturers of coffins take into account the fact that the total annual sale of
coffins cannot exceed the number of people deceased during this period.
The machine industry reckons with the average "life" of its products no
less than do the tailors, the shoemakers, the manufacturers of motorcars,
radio sets, and refrigerators, and the construction firms. There are, to be
sure, always promoters who in a mood of deceptive optimism are prone to
overexpand their enterprises. In the pursuit of such projects they snatch
away factors of production from other plants of the same industry and
from other branches of industry. Thus their overexpansion results in a
relative restriction of output in other fields. One branch goes on expanding while others shrink until the unprofitability of the former and the
profitability of the latter rearranges conditions. Both the preceding boon)
and the following slump concern only a part of business.
-.
1 he second variety of these dlsproport~onalltydoctrines is known as the
acceleration principle. A temporary rise in the demand for a certain commodity results in increased production of the commodity concerned. If,
then, demand later drops again, the investments made for this expansion
of production appear as malinvestments. This becomes especially pernicious in the field of durable producers' goods. If the demand for the consumers' good n increases by 10 per cent, business increases the equipment p
required for its production by 10per cent. The resulting rise in the demand
for p is the more momentous in proportion to the previous demand for p,
the longer the duration of serviceableness of a piece of p is and the smaller

consequently the previous demand for the replacement of worn-out pieces
of p was. If the life of a piece of p is I o years, the annual demand for p for
replacement was 10 per cent of the stock of p previously employed by the
industry. The rise of 10 per cent in the demand for a doubles therefore the
demand for p and results in a roo per cent expansion in the equipment r
needed for the production of p. If then the demand for a stops increasing,
50 per cent of the production capacity of r remains idle. If the annual increase in the demand for a drops from 10 per cent to 5 per cent, 25 per cent
of the production capacity of r cannot be used.
T h e fundamental error of this doctrine is that it considers entrepreneurial activities as a blindly automatic response to the momentary state of demand. Whenever demand increases and renders a branch of business more
profitable, production facilities are supposed instantly to expand in proportion. This view is untenable. Entrepreneurs often err. They pay heavily
for their errors. But whoever acted in the way the acceleration principle
describes would not be an entrepreneur, but a soulless automaton. Yet the
real entrepreneur is a s ~ e c u l i l t o ra, ~ ~
man eager to utilize his opinion about
the future structure of the market for business operations promising profits. This specific anticipative understanding of the conditions of the uncertain future defies any rules and systematization. It can be neither taught
nor learned. If it were different, everybody could embark upon entrepreneurship with the same prospect of success. What distinguishes the
successful entrepreneur and promoter from other people is precisely the
fact that he does not Iet himself be guided by what was and is, but arranges
his affairs on the ground of his opinion about the future. H e sees the past
and the present as other people do; but he judges the future in a different
way. In his actions he is directed by an opinion about the future which
deviates from those held by the crowd. T h e impulse of his actions is that
he appraises the factors of production and the future prices of the commodities which can be produced out of them in a different way from other
people. If the present structure of prices renders very profitable the business of those who are today selling the articles concerned, their production
will expand only to the extent that entrepreneurs believe that the favorable
market constellation will last long enough to make new investments pay.
If entrepreneurs do not expect this, even very high profits of the enterprises aiready operating wiii not bring about an expansion. It IS exactly thls
reluctance of the capitalists and entrepreneurs to invest in lines which they
consider unprofitable that is violently criticized by people who do not
comprehend the operation of the market economy. Technocratically
minded engineers complain that the supremacy of the profit motive prevents consumers from being amply supplied with all those goods with
which technological knowledge could provide them. Demagogues cry out
against the greed of capitalists intent upon preserving scarcity.
18.It is noteworthy that the same term is employed to signify the premeditation and the ensuing actions of the promoters and cntreprcneurs and the purely
academic rcasoning of theorists that does not directly result in any action.

Interest, Credit Expansion, the Trade Cycle

583

A satisfactory explanation of business fluctuations must not be built upon
the fact that individual firms or groups of firms misjudge the future state
of the market and therefore make bad investments. The objective of the
trade cycle theory is the general upswing of business activities, the propensity to expand production in all branches of industry, and the following
general depression. These phenomena cannot be brought about by the fact
that increased profits in some branches of business result in their expansion
and a corresponding overproportional investment in the industries manufacturing the equipment needed for such an expansion.
It is a very well known fact that the more the boom progresses, the
harder it becomes to buy machines and other equipment. The plants producing these things are overloacled with orders. Their customers must wait
a long time until the machines ordered are delivered. This clearly shows
that the producers' goods industries are not so quick in the expansion of
their own production facilities as the acceleration principle assumes.
But even if, for the sake of argument, we were ready to admit that capitalists and entrepreneurs behave in the way the disproportionality doctrines
describe, it remains inexplicabIe how they could go on in the absence of
credit expansion. The striving after such additional investments raises the
prices of the complementary factors of production and the rate of interest
on the loan market. These effects would curb the expansionist tendencies
very soon if there were no credit expansion.
T h e supporters of the disproportionality doctrines refer to certain occurrences in the field of farming as a confirmation of their assertion concerning the inherent lack of provision on the part of private business. However, it is impermissible to demonstrate characteristic features of free
competitive enterprise as operating in the market economy by pointing to
conditions in the sphere of mcdium-size and small farming. In many countries this sphere is institutionally removed from the supremacy of the
market and the consumers. Government interference is eager to protect the
farmer against the vicissitudes of the market. These farmers do not operate
in a free market; they are privileged and pampered by various devices. The
orbit of their production activities is a reservation, as it were, in which
technological backwardness, narrow-minded obstinacy, and entrepreneurial inefficiency are artificially preserved at the expense of the nonagricult u r d strata of the people. If they blunder in their conduct of affairs, the
government forces the consumers, the taxpayers, and the mortgagees to
foot the bill.
It is true that there is such a thing as the corn-hog cycle and analogous
happenings in the production of other farm products. But the recurrence of
such cycles is due to the fact that the penalties which the market applies
against inefficient and clumsy entrepreneurs do not affect a great part of
the farmers. These farmers are not answerable for their actions because
they are the pet children of governments and politicians. If it were not so,
they would long since have gone bankrupt and their former farms would
be operated by more intelligent people.

XXI. WORK AND WAGES
1.

Introversive Labor and Extroversive Labor

111ay overcome the disutility of labor (forego the enjoyof leisure) for various reasons.
A Hment
e may work in order to make his mind and body strong, vigorMAX

r.
ous, and agile. The disutility of labor is not a price expended for
the attainment of these goals; overcoming it is inseparable from the
contentment sought. The most conspicuous examples are genuine
sport, practiced without any design for reward and social success;
the search for truth and knowledge pursued for its own sake and not
as a means of improving one's own efficiency and skill in the performance of other kinds of labor aiming at other ends.l
2 . H e may submit to the disutility of labor in order to serve God.
He sacrifices leisure to please God and to be rewarded in the beyond
by eternal bliss and in the earthly pilgrimage by the supreme delight
which the certainty of having complied with all religious duties
affords. (If, however, he serves God in order to attain worldly ends
-his daily bread and success in his secular affairs-his conduct does
not differ substantially from other endeavors to attain mundane advantages by expending labor. Whether the theory guiding his conduct
is correct and whether his expectations will materialize is irrelevant
to the catallactic qualification of his mode of a ~ t i n g . ~ )
3. He may toil in order to avoid greater mischief. He submits to
the disutility of labor in order to forget, to escape from depressing
thoughts and to banish annoying moods; work for him is, as it were, a
perfected refinement of play. This refined playing must not be confused with the simple games of children which are merely pIeasureproducing. (However, there are also other children's games. Children
too are sophisticated enough to indulge in refined play.)
1. Cognition does not aim at a goal beyond the act of knowing. What satisfies
the thinker is thinking as such, not obtaining perfect knowledge, a goal inaccessible to man.
2. It is hardly necessary to remark that comparing the craving for knowledge
and the conduct of a pious life with sport and play does not imply any disparagement of either.

W o r k and Wages
4, H e may work because he prefers the proceeds he can earn by
working to the disutility of labor and the pleasures of leisure.
The labor of the classes I , 2 , and 3 is expended because the disutility
of labor in itself-and not its product-satisfies. One toils and troubles
not in order to reach a goal at the termination of the march, but for
the very sake of marching. The mountain-clirnber does not want
simply to reach the peak, he wants to reach it by climbing. He disdains
the rack railway which would bring him to the summit more quickly
and without trouble even though the fare is cheaper than the costs
incurred by climbing (e.g., the guide's fee). The toil of climbing
does not gratify him immediately; it involves disutility of labor. But
it is precisely overcoming the disutility of labor that satisfies him. A
less exerting ascent would please him not better, but less.
Wc may call the labor of classes I, 2, and 3 introversive labor and
distinguish it from the extroversive labor of class 4. In some cases
introversive labor may bring about-as a by-product as it wereresults for the attainment of which other people would submit to the
disutility of labor. The devout may nurse sick people for a heavenly
reward; the truth seeker, exclusively devoted to the search for
knowledge, may discover a practically useful device. T o this extent
introversive labor may influence the supply on the market. But as a
rule catallactics is concerned only with extroversive labor.
The psychological problems raised by introversive labor are catallactically irrelevant. Seen from the point of view of economics intraversive labor is to be qualified as consumption. Its performance as a
rule requires not only the personal efforts of the individuals concerned, but also the expenditure of material factors of production and
the produce of other peoples' extroversive, not immediately gratifying labor that must be bought by the payment of wages. The practice
of religion requires places of worship and their equipment; sport
requires diverse utensils and apparatus, trainers and coaches. All
these things beIong in the orbit of consumption.
2.

Joy and Tedium of Labor

Only extroversive, not immediately gratifying labor is a topic of
catallactic disquisition. The dlaracteristic mark of this kind of labor
is that it is performed for the sake of an end which is beyond its performance and the disutility which it involves. PeopIe work because
they want to reap the produce of labor. The labor itseIf causes disutility. But apart from this disutility which is irksome and would enjoin upon man the urge to economize labor even if his power to work

were not limited and he were able to perform unlimited work, special
emotional phenomena sometimes appear, fcelings of joy or tedium,
accompanying the execution of certain kinds of labor.
Both, the joy and the tedium of labor, are in a dornain other than the
disutility of labor. T h e joy of labor therefore can neither alleviate
nor remove the disutility of labor. Kcither must the joy of labor be
confused with the immediate gratification provided by certain kinds
of work. It is an attendant phenomenon which proceeds either from
labor's mediate gratification, the produce or reward, or from some
accessory circumstances.
People do not submit to the disutility of labor for the sake of the joy
which accompanies the labor, but for the sake of its mediate gratification. In fact the joy of labor presupposes for the most part the disutility of the labor concerned.
The sources from which the joy of labor springs are:
I . T h c expectation of the labor's mediate gratification, the anticipation of the enjoyment of its success and yield. The toiler looks at his
work as a means for the attainment of an end sought, and the progress
of his work delights him as an approach toward his goal. His joy
is a foretaste of the satisfaction conveyed by the mediate gratification.
In the frame of social cooperation this joy manifests itself in the contentment of being capable of holding one's ground in the social organism and of rendering services which one's fellowmen appreciate
eithcr in buying thc product or in remunerating the labor expcnded.
The worker rcjoices because he gets self-respect and the consciousness
of supporting himself and his family and not being dependent on other
people's mercy.
2. In the pursuit of his work the workcr enjoys the aesthetic appreciation of his skill and its product. This is not merely the contemplative pleasure of the man who views things performed by other
people. It is the pride of a man who is in a position to say: I know
how to make such things, this is my work.
3. Having completed a task the worker enjoys the feeling of having successfully overcome all the toil and troublc involved. He is
happy in being rid of something difficult, unpleasant, and painful, in
being relieved for a certain time of the disutility of labor. His is the
feeline of "I have done it."
3
4. Some kinds of work satisfy particular wishes. There are, for example, occupations which meet erotic desires-either conscious or
subconscious ones. These desires may be normal or perverse. Also
fetishists, homosexuals, sadists and other perverts can sometimes find
in their work an opportunity to satisfy their strange appetites. There

W o r k and Wages

587

arc occupations which arc cspecially attractive t o such people. Cruelty
and bIood-thirstiness luxuriantly thrive under various occupationd
cloaks.
T h e various kinds of work offer difierent conditions for the appcarance of thc joy of labor. Thcse conditions may be by and largc
n1oJ-e homogeneous in classes I and 3 than in class 2. I t is obvious that
they are more rarely present for class 4.
T h e joy of labor can be cntircIy abscnt. Psychical factors may
clin~inatc;t altogether. On the othcr hand one can prposel; aim at
increasing thc joy of lahor.
Keen disccrncrs of the human soul have always been intent upon
e ~ ~ h a n c i nthe
g joy of labor. A grcat part of the achievements of the
organizers and leadcrs of armies of mercenaries belongcd to this field.
Their task was easy as far as the profession of arms provides the
satisfactions of class 4. However, these satisfactions do not depend
o n the arms-bearer's Ioyalty. T h e y also come to the soldier who leaves
his war-lord in the lurch and turns against him in the service of new
Icadcrs. Thus the particular task of the employcrs of nlcrcenaries was
t o promote an esprit dc corps and loyalty that could render their hirelings proof against temptations. There were also, of course, chiefs who
did not bother about such irnpalpablc matters. I n the armies and navies
of the eighteenth century the only rncans of securing obedience and
preventing desertion wcre barbarous punishments.
Modern ir~dustrialismu a s not intent upon designedly increasing
the joy of labor. It relied upon thc material improvenlent that it
brought to its crnployees in their capacity as wage earners as wcll
as in their capacity as consumers and buyers of the products. In view
of the fact that job-seclrers thronged to the plants and cvcrvone
scrambled for the inanufactures, there secmcd to bc no need to risort
t o special devices. 3 he benefits which the masses dcrired from the
capitalist system were so obvious that no cntrepreneur considered it
necessary to harangue the worlters with procapitalist propaganda.
R4odern capitalism is essentially mass production for thc ncecls of the
masses. T h e buyers of the products are by and large the same pcople
who as wage earners cooperate in their manufacturing. Rising sales
provided dependable information to the employer about the improvcrncnt of the masses' standard of living. H c did not bother about the
feclings of his cmplovees as vr~orltcrs.H e was cxcIusivcly intent upon
serving them as consumcrs. Even today, in face of thc most persistent
and fanatical anticapitali\t propagmda, there is hardly any counterpropaganda.
This anticapitalist propaganda is a systematic scheme for the sub-

588
Human Action
stitution of tedium for the joy of labor. The joy of labor of classes
I and 2 depends to some extent on ideological factors. The worker
rejoices in his place in society and his active cooperation in its productive effort. If one disparages this ideology and replaces it by
another which represents the wage earner as the distressed victim
of ruthless exploiters, one turns the joy of labor into a feeling of
disgust and tedium.
No ideology, however jmpressively emphasized and taught, can
affect the disutility of labor. It is impossible to remove or to alleviate
it by persuasion or hypnotic suggestion. On thc other hand it cannot
be increased by words and doctrines. The disutility of labor is a
phenomenon unconditionally given. The spontaneous and carefree
discharge of one's own energies and vital functions in aimless freedom
suits everybody better than the stern restraint of purposive effort.
The disutility of labor also pains a man who with heart and soul and
even with seIf-denial is devoted to his work. He too is eager to reduce
the lump of labor if it can be done without prejudice to the mediate
gratification expected, and he enjoys the joy of labor of class 3.
However, the joy of labor of classes I and 2 and somctinlcs even that
of class 3 can be eIiminated by ideological influences and be replaced
by the tedium of labor. T h e worker begins to hate his work if he
becomes convinced that what makes him submit to the disutility of
labor is not his own higher valuation of the stipulated compensation,
but merely an unfair social system. Deluded by the slogans of the
socialist propagandists, he fails to realize that the disutility of labor is
an inexorable fact of human conditions, something uItimatcly given
that cannot be removed by devices or methods of social organization.
He falls prey to the Marxian fallacy that in a socialist commonwealth
work will arouse not pain but pleas~re.~
T h e fact that the tedium of labor is substituted for the joy of labor
affects the valuation neither of the disutility of labor nor of the produce of labor. Both the demand for labor and the supply of labor
remain unchanged. For people do not work for the sake of labor's
joy, but for the sake of the rnediate gratification. What is altered is
merely the worker's emotional attitude. His work, his position in the
cornpiex of the social division of labor, his relations to other members
of society and to the whole of society appear to him in a new light. He
pities himself as the defenseless victim of an absurd and unjust system.
He becomes an ill-humored grumbler, an unbalanced personality, an
easy prey to all sorts of quacks and cranks. T o be joyful in the per3. Engels, Herrn Eugen Diihrings Umwalzzmg der Wissenschaft (7th ed.
Stuttgart, I ~ I O ) ,
p. 317.

Work and Wages

589

formance of one's tasks and in overcoming the disutility of labor
makes people cheerful and strengthens their energies and vital forces.
T o feel tedium in working makes people morose and neurotic. A
commonwealth in which the tedium of labor prevails is an assemblage
of rancorous, quarrelsome, and wrathful malcontents.
However, with regard to the volitionaI springs for overcoming the
disutility of labor, the role played by the joy and the tedium of labor
is merely accidental and supererogatory. There cannot be any question
of making people work for the mere sake of the joy of labor. The joy
of labor is no substitute for the mediate gratification of labor. The only
means of inducing a man to work more and better is to offer him a
higher reward. It is vain to bait him with the joy of labor. When the
dictators of Soviet Russia, hlazi Germany, and Fascist Italy tried to
assign to the joy of labor a definite function in their system of production, they saw their expectations blighted.
Neither the joy nor the tedium of labor ran influence the amount
of labor offered on the market. ,4s far as these feelings are present
with the same intensity in all kinds of work, the case is obvious. But
it is the same with regard to joy and tedium which are conditioned
by the particular features of the work concerned or the particular
character of the worker. 1,et us look, for example, at the joy of class
4. The eagerness of certain people to get jobs which offer an opportunity for the enjoyment of these particular satisfactions tends to
lower wage rates in this field. But it is precisely this effect that makes
other people, less responsive to these questionable pleasures, prefer
other sectors of the labor market in which they can earn more. Thus
an opposite tendency develops which neutralizes the first one.
The joy and the tedium of labor are psychological phenomena
which influence neither the individual's subjective valuation of the
disutility and the mediate gratification of labor nor the price paid
for labor on the market.

3. Wages
Labor is a scarce factor of production. As such it is sold and bought
on the market. The price paid for labor is included in the price allowed
for the product or the services if the performer of the work is the
seller of the product or the services. If bare labor is sold and bought
as such, either by an entrepreneur engaged in production for sale or
by a consumer eager to use the services rendered for his own consumption, the price paid is called wages.
For acting man his own labor is not merely a factor of production

590
Human Action
but also the source of disutility; he values it not only with regard to
the mediate gratification expected but also with regard to the disutility it causes. But for him, as for everyone, other people's labor as
offered for sale on the market is nothing but a factor of production.
Man deals with other people's labor in the same way that he deals with
all scarce material factors of production. H e appraises it according
to the principles he applies in the appraisal of all other goods. The
height of wage rates is determined on the market in the same way in
which the prices of all commodities are determined. In this sensk we
may say that labor is a commodity. T h e emotional associations which
people, under the influence of Marxism, attach to this term do not
matter. It suffices to observe incidentally that the employers deal with
labor as they do with commodities because the conduct of the consumers forces them to proceed in this way.
I t is not permissible to speak of labor and wages in general without
resorting to certain restrictions. A uniform type of labor or a general
rate of wages do not exist. Labor is very different in quality, and
each kind of labor renders specific services. Each is appraised as 3
complementary factor for turning out definite consumers' goods and
services. Between the appraisal of the performance of a surgeon and
that of a stevedore there is no direct connection. But indirectIy each
sector of the labor ~narketis connected with all other sectors. An increase in the demand for surgical services, however great, will not
make stevedores flock into the practice of surgery. Yet the lines between the various sectors of the labor market are not sharply drawn.
There prevails a continuous tendency for workers to shift from their
branch to other similar occupations in which conditions seen1 to offer
better opportunities. Thus finally every change in demand or supply
in one sector affects all other sectors indirectly. All groups indirectlv
compete with one another. If more people enter the medical
sion, men are withdrawn from kindred occupations who again are
replaced by an inflow of people from other branches and so on. In
thls sense there exists a connexity between aii occupationai groups
however different the requirements in each of them may be. There
again we are faced with the fact that the disparity in the quality of
work needed for the satisfaction of wants is geateE than the diversity
in men's inborn ability to perform work.4
Connexity exists not only between different types of labor and
the prices paid for them b i t no less between labor and the material
factors of production. Within certain limits labor can be substituted
for material factors of production and vice versa. T h e extent that such
4. Cf. above, pp. 133-135.

Work and Wages

591

substitutions are resorted to depends on the height of wage rates and
the prices of material factors.
The determination of wage rates-like that of the prices of material
factors of production-can be achieved only on the market. There
is no such thing as nonmarket wage rates, just as there are no nonmarket prices. As far as there are wages, labor is deaIt with like any
material factor of production and sold and bought on the market. It
is usual to call the sector of the market of producers' goods on which
labor is hired the labor market. As with all other sectors of the market,
the labor market is actuated by the entrepreneurs intent upon making
profits. Each entrepreneur is eager to buy all the kinds of specific labor
he needs for the realization of his planswatthe cheapest price. But the
wages he offers nlmt be high enough to take the workers away from
competing entrepreneurs. The upper limit of his bidding is determined
by anticipation of the price he can obtain for the increment in salable
goods he expects from the employment of the worker concerned.
The lower limit is determined by the bids of competing entrepreneurs
who themselves are guided by analogous considerations. It is this that
economists have in mind in asserting that the height of wage rates for
each kind of labor is determined by its marginal productivity. Another way to express the same truth is to say that wage rates are determined by the supply of labor and of material factors of production
on the one hand and by the anticipated future prices of the consumers'
goods.
This catallactic explanation of the determination of wage rates has
been the target of passionate but entirely erroneous attacks. It has
been asserted that there is a monopoly of the demand for labor. Most
of the supporters of this doctrine think that they have sufficiently
proved their case by referring to some incidental remarks of Adam
Smith concerning "a sort of tacit but constant and uniform combination" among emphyers to keep wages down.5 Others refer in vague
terms to the existence of trade associations of various groups of businessmen. The emptiness of all this talk is evident. However, the fact
that these garbled ideas are the main ideological foundation of labor
unionism and the labor policy of all contemporary governments makes
it necessary to analyze them with the utmost care.
The entrepreneurs are in the same position with regard to the sellers
of labor as they are with regard to the sellers of the ~naterialfactors of
production. They are under the necessity of acquiring all factors of
5. Cf. Adam Smith, A n Inquiry into the Nature and Causes o f the M7ealth of
Nations (Basle, 1791),vol. I, Bk. I, chap. viii, p. loo. Adam Smith himself seems
t o have unconsciously given up the idea. Cf. W. H. Hutt, T h e T l ~ e o r yo f Collective Bargaining (London, 1930), pp. 24-25.

592
Human A c t i o ~
production at the cheapest price. But if in the pursuit of this endeavor some entrepreneurs, certain groups of entrepreneurs, or all
entrepreneurs offer prices or wage rates which are too low, i.e., do not
agree with the state of the unhampered market, they will succeed
in acquiring what they want to acquire only if entrance into the
ranks of entrepreneurship is blocked through institutional barriers.
If the emergence of new entrepreneurs or the expansion of the activities of already operating entrepreneurs is not prevented, any drop
in the prices of factors of production not consonant with the structure
of the market must open new chances for the earning of profits. There
will be ~ e o p l eeager to take advantage of the margin between the
prevailing wage rate and the marginal productivity of labor. Their
demand for labor will bring wage rates back to the hcight conditioned
by labor's marginal productivity. T h e tacit combination among the
employers to which Adam Smith referred, even if it cxistcd, could
not lower wages below the competitive market rate unless access to
entrepreneurship required not only brains and capital (the latter always available to enterprises promising the highest returns), bat in
addition also an institutional title, a patent, or a license, rcserved to
a class of privileged people.
It has been asserted that a job-seeker must sell his labor at any price,
however low, as he depends excIusively on his capacity to work and
has no other source of income. H e cannot wait and is forced to content
himself with any reward the employers are kind enough to offer him.
This inherent weakness makes it easy for the concerted action of the
masters to lower wage rates. They can, if need be, wait longer, as
their demand for labor is not so urgent as the worker's demand for
subsistence. The argument is defective. It takes it for granted that the
employers pocket the difference between the marginal-productivity
wage rate and the lower monopoly rate as an extra monopoly gain and
do not pass it on to the consumers in the form of a reduction in prices.
For if they were to reduce prices according to the drop in costs of
production, they, in their capacity of entrepreneurs and sellers of
the products, would derive no advantage from cutting wages. The
whole gain would go to the consumers and thereby also to the wageearners in thcir capacity as buyers; the entrepreneurs themselves would
be benefited only as consumers. However, to rctain the extra profit
resulting from the "exploitation" of the workers' poor bargaining
power would require concerted action on the part of employers in
their capacity as sellers of the products. It would require a universal
monopolv of all kinds of production activities which can he cre-

Work and Wages

593

ated only by an institutional restriction of access to entrepreneurship.
The cssential point of the mattcr is that the alleged monopolistic
combination of the en~ployersabout which Adam Smith and a great
part of public opinion speak would be a monopoly of demand. But
we have already seen that such alleged monopolies of demand are in
fact nlonopolies of supply of a particular character. The employers
would be in a position enabling them to lower wage rates by concerted
action only if they were to ~nonopolizea factor indispensable for
every kind of production and ro restrict the employment of this factor
in a monopolistic way. As thcre is no single material factor indispensable for every kind of ~roduction,they would have to nlonopolize
all material factors of production. This condition would be present
only in a socialist community, in which there is neither a market
nor prices and wage rates.
Neither would it be possible for the proprietors of the material
factors of production, the capitalists and the landowners, to combine
in a universal cartel against the interests of the workers. The characteristic mark of production activities in the past: and in the forcseeable
future is that the scarcity of labor exceeds t:hc scarcity of most of
the primary, nature-given material factors of production. The comparatively greater scarcity of labor determines the extent to which
the comparatively abundant primary natural factors can be utilized.
There is unused soil, there are unused mineral deposits and so on because there is not enough labor available for their utilization. If the
owners of the soil that is tilled today were to form a cartel in order to
reap monopoly gains, their plans would be frustrated by the competition of the owners of the submarginal land. The owners of the
produced factors of production in their turn could not combine in a
comprehensive cartel without the cooperation of the owners of the
primary factors.
Various other objections have been advanced against the doctrine
of the monopolistic exploitation of labor by a tacit or avowed combine of the employers. It has been demonstrated that at no time and
at no place in the unhampered market economy can the existence of
such cartels be discovered. I t has been shown that it is not true that
the job-seekers cannot wait and are therefore under the necessity of
accepting any wage rates, however low, offered to them by the employers. It isnot true that every unemployed worker is faced with
starvation; the workers too have reserves and can wait; the proof is
that they really do wait. On the other hand waiting can be financially
ruinous to the entrepreneurs and capitalists too. If they cannot ernploir

594
Human Action
their capital, they suffer losses. Thus all the disquisitions about an
alleged "employers' advantage" and "workers' disadvantage" in bargaining are without sub~tance.~
But these are secondary and accidental considerations. The central
fact is that a monopoly of the demand for labor cannot and does not
exist in an unhampered market economy. It could originate only as
an outgrowth of institutional restrictions of access to entrepreneurship.
Yet one point must be stressed. The doctrine of the monopolistic
manipulation of wage rates by the employers speaks of labor as if it
were a homogeneous entity. It deals with such concepts as demand
for "labor in general" and supply of "labor in general." But such
notions have, as has been pointed out already, no counterpart in
reality. What is sold and bought on the labor market is not "labor in
generd," but definite specific labor suitable to render definite services.
Each entrepreneur is in search of workers who are fitted to accomplish
those specific tasks which he needs for the execution of his plans. H e
must withdraw these specialists from the employments in which they
happen to work at the moment. T h e only means he has to achieve
this is to offer them higher pay. Every innovation which an entrepreneur plans-the production of a new article, the application of a
new process of production, the choice of a new location for a specific
branch or simply the expansion of production already in existence
either in his own enterprise or in other enterprises-requires the
employment of worlrcrs hitherto engaged somewhere else. The entrepreneurs are not merely faced with a shortage of "labor in generaI,"
but with a shortage of those specific types of labor they need for
their plants. The competition among the entrepreneurs in bidding for
the most suitable hands is no less keen than their competition in bidding
for the required raw materials, tools, and machines and in their bidding
for capital on the capital and loan market. The expansion of the activities
.. of the individual firms as well as of the whole society is not only
l~mitedby the amount of capitai goods avaiiabie and of the suppiy
of "labor in general." In each branch of production it is also limited
by the available supply of specialists. This is7 of course, only a temporary obstacle which vanishes in the long run when more workers,
attracted by the higher pay of the specialists in comparatively undermanned branches, will have trained themselves for the special tasks
concerned. Rut in the changing economy such a scarcity of specialists
6 . All these and many other points are carefully anaIyzed by Hutt, op. cit.,

PP. 35-72.

W o r k and Wages

595

emerges anew daily and determines the conduct of employers in
their search for workers.
Every employer must aim at buying the factors of production
needed, inclusive of labor, at the cheapest price. An employer who
paid more than agrees with the market price of the services his employees render him, would be soon removed from his entrepreneurial
position. On the other hand an employer who tried to reduce wage
rates below the height consonant with the marginal productivity of
labor would not recruit the type of men that the most efficient utilization of his equipment requires. There prevails an inevitable tendency
for wage rates to reach the point at which they are equal to the price
of the marginal product of the kind of labor in question. If wage
rates drop below this point, the gain derived from the employment
of every additional worker will increase the demand for labor and thus
make wage rates rise again. If wage rates rise above this point, the
loss incurred from the employment of every worker will force the
employers to discharge workers. The competition of the unemployed
for jobs will create a tendency for wage rates to drop.

4. Catallactic Unemployment
If a job-seeker cannot obtain the position he prefers, he must look
for another kind of job. If he cannot find an employer ready to pay
him as much as he would like to earn, he must abate his pretensions. If
he refuses, he will not get any job. He remains unemployed.
What causes unen~ploymentis the fact that-contrary to the abovementioned doctrine of the worker's inability to wait-those eager to
earn wages can and do wait. A job-seeker who does not want to wait
will always get a job in the unhampered market economy in which
there is aIways unused capacity of natural resources and very often
also unused capacity of produced factors of production. It is only
necessary for him either to reduce the amount of pay he is asking f i r
or to alter his occupation or his place of work.
There were and still are people who work only for some time and
then live for another period from the savings they have accumulated
by working. In countries in which the cultural state of the masses
is low, it is often difficult to recruit workers who are ready to stay
on the job. The average man there is so callous and inert that he knows
of no other use for his earnings than to buy some leisure time. He
works only in order to remain unemployed for some time.
It is different in the civiIized countries. Here the worker looks

Human Action

5 96

upon unen~ploymentas an evil. H e would like to avoid it provided
the sacrifice required is not too grievous. H e chooses between employment and unemployment in the same way in which he proceeds in all
othcr actions and choices: he weighs the pros and cons. If he chooses
unemployment, this unemployment is a market phenomenon whose
nature is not different from other market phcnomena as they appear
in a changing market economy. W e may call this kind of unemployment market-generated or catallactic unemployment.
T h e various considerations which maj7 induce a man to decide for
unemployment can be classified in this way:
I . T h e individual believes that he will find at a later date a rcinunerative job in his dwelling place and in an occupation which he
likes better and for which he has been trained. H e seeks to avoid the
expenditure and other disadvantages involved in shifting from one
occupation to another and from one geographical
to another.
There may be special conditions increasing these costs. A worker who
owns a homestead is more firmly linked with the place of his residence
than people living in rented apartments. A married woman is less
mobile than an unrnarricd girl. Then there are occupations which impair the worker's ability t o resume his previous job at a later date.
A watchmaker who works for some time as a lumberman may lose
the dexterity required for his previous job. In all thesc cases the
iildivid~~al
chooses temporary unemployment because he believes that
this choice pays better in the long run.
2 . There are occupations the demand for which is subject to considerable seasonal variations. In somc months of the year the demand
is very intense, in other months it dwindlcs or disappears altogether.
The structure of wage rates discounts thesc seasonal fluctuations.
The branches of industry subject to them can compete on the labor
market only if the wages they pay in the good season are high enough
to indemnify the wage earners for the disadvantagcs resulting from the
seasonal irregularity in demand. Then many of the workcrs, having
-----.cL- --n n r t ,.C
'..rli0A
SC;&OII,
ULIL L I I I ~ I LL C U I I ; ~ > ;II ~ 1 1 ~f ; ; ~ ~
b ICI&I
y
a f ~VI +Lo;" *--l,
f;
employed in the had season.
3. T h e individual chooses temporary unemployment for considerations which in popular speech are calIed'noneconomic or even irrationaI. H e does not take jobs which are incompatible with his religious, moral, and political convictions. H e shuns occupations the
exercise of which would impair his social prestige. H e lets himself be
guided by traditional standards of what is proper for a gentleman and
what is unworthy. H e does not want to lose face or caste.
Unemployment in the unhampered market is always voluntary.
n

J L L V ~ L L

~1.

LUCU

,n,,.,--

.-r

I
,
.
-

Work and Wages

597

In the eyes of the unemployed man, unempIoynient is the minor
of two evils between which he has to choose. T h e structure of the
market may sometimes cause wage rates to drop. But, on the unhampered market, there is always for each type of Iabor a rate at
which all those eager to work can get a job. T h e final wage rate is
that rate at which all job-seekers get jobs and all employers as many
workers as they want to hire. Its height is determined by the marginal
productivity of each type of work.
Wage rate fluctuations are the device by means of which the
sovcreignty of the consumers manifests itself on the labor market.
They are the measure adopted for the allocation of labor to the various
branches of productior~.They penalizc disobedience by cutting wagc
rates in the comparatively overmanned branches and recompense
obedience by raising u,age rates in the comparatively undcrrnanned
branches. They thus submit the individual to a harsh social pressure.
It is obvious that they indirectly limit the individual's freedom to
choose his occupation. Rut this coercion is not rigid. It leaves to the
individual a margin in the limits of which he can choose 1)etween what
suits him better and what less. Within this orbit he is free to act of
his own accord. This amount of freedom is the maximum of freedom
that an individual can enjoy in the framework of the social division
of labor, and this amount of coercion is the minimum of coercion
that is indispensable for the preservation of the system of social cooperation. There is only one alternative left to the catallactic pressure
exercised by the wages system: the assignment of occupations and
jobs to each individual by the peremptory decrees of an authority,
a central board planning all production acitivities. This is tantamount
to the suppression of all freedom.
It is true that under the wages system the individual is not free to
choose permanent unemployment. Gut no other imaginable social
system could grant him a right to unIimited leisure. That man cannot
avoid submitting to the disutility of labor is not an outgrowth of any
social institution. It is an inescapable natural condition of human life
and conduct.
It is not expedient ro call catallactic unenlployment in a metaphor
borrowed from mechanics "frictional" unemployment. I n the
imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy there is no
unemployment because we have based this construction on such an
assumption. Unemployment is a phenomenon of a changing economy.
T h e fact that a worker discharged on account of changes occurring
in the arrangement of production processes does not instantly take
advantage of every opportunity to get another job but waits for a

598
Human Action
more propitious opportunity is not a consequence of the tardiness of
the adjustment to the change in conditions, bnt is one of the factors
slowing down the pace of thls adjustment. It is not an automatic reaction to the changes which have occurred, independent of the will and
the choices of the job-seekers concerned, but the effect of their intentional actions. It is speculative, not frictional.
Catallactic unemployment must not be confused with institutional
z~nemployment.Institutional unemployment is not the outcome of
the decisions of the individuaI job-seekers. It is the effect of interference with the market phenomena intent upon enforcing by coercion and compulsion wage rates higher than those the unhampered
market would have determined. 'The treatment of institutional unemployment belongs to the analysis of the problems of interventionism.

5. Gross Wage Rates and N e t Wage Rates
What the employer buys on the labor market and what he gets
in exchange for the wages paid is always a definite performance which
he appraises according to its market price. The customs and usages
prevailing on the various sectors of the labor market do not influence
the prices paid for definite quantities of specific performances. Gross
wage rates always tend toward the point at which they are equal
to the price for which the increment resulting from the employment
of the marginal worker can be sold on the market, due allowance being
made for the price of the required materials and to originary interest
on the capital needed.
In weighing the pros and cons of the hiring of workers the employer does not ask himseIf what the worker gets as take-home wages.
The only relevant question for him is: What is the total price I have
to expend for securing the services of this worker? In speaking of
the determination of wage rates catallactics always refers to the total
price which the employer must spend for a definite quantity of work
of a definite type, i.e., to gross wage rates. If laws or business customs
force the employer to make other expenditures besides the wages
he pays to the employee, the take-home wages are reduced accordingly. Such accessory expenditures do not affect the gross rate of
wages. Their incidence falls entirely upon the wage-earner. Their
total amount reduces the height of take-home wages, is., of net
wage rates.
It is necessary to realize the following consequences of this state of
affairs:
I . It does not matter whether wages are time wages or piecework

Work and Wages

599

wages. Also where there are time wages, the employek takes only one
thing into account; namely, the average performance he expects to
obtain from each worker employed. His calculation discounts all the
opportunities time work offers to shirkers and cheaters. H e discharges
workers who do not perform the minimum expected. On the other
hand a worker eager to earn more must either shift to piecework or
seek a job in which pay is higher because the minimum of achievement
expected is greater.
Neither does it matter on an unhampered labor market whether time
wages are paid daily, weekly, monthly, or as annual wages. It does
not matter whether the time allowed for notice of discharge is longer
or shorter, whether agreements are made for definite periods or for
the worker's life time, whether the employee is entitled to retirement
and a pension for himseIf, his widow, and his orphans, to paid or unpaid vacations, to certain assistance in case of illness or invalidism or
to any other benefits and privileges. The question the employer faces
is always the same: Does it or does it not pay for me to enter into such
a contract? Don't I pay too much for what I am getting in return?
2. Consequently the incidence of all so-called social burdens and
gains ultimately falls upon the worker's net wage rates. It is irrelevant
whether or not the employer is entitled to deduct the contributions
to all kinds 'of social security from the wages he pays in cash to the
employee. At any rate these contributions burden the employee, not
the employer.
3. The same holds true with regard to taxes on wages. Here too
it does not matter whether the employer has or has not the right to
deduct them from take-home wages.
4. Neither is a shortening of the hours of work a free gift to the
worker. If he does not compensate for the shorter hours of work by
increasing his output accordingly, time wages will drop correspondingly. If the law decreeing a shortening of the hours of work prohibits such a reduction in wage rates, all the consequences of a
government-decreed rise in wage rates appear. The same is valid with
regard to all other so-called social gains, such as paid vacations and
SO on.
5. If the government grants to the employer a subsidy for the
employment of certain classes of workers, their take-home wages are
increased by the total amount of such a subsidy.
6. If the authorities grant to every employed worker whose own
earnings lag behind a certain minimum standard an allowance raising
his income to this minimum, the height of wage rates is not directly
affected. Indirectly a drop in wage rates could possibly result as far

Human Action

600

as this system c'ould induce people who did not work before to seek
jobs and thus bring about an increase in the supply of labor.'

6. Wages and Subsistence
T h e life of primitive man was an unceasing struggle against the
scantiness of the nature-given means for his sustenance. In this desperate effort to secure bare survival, many individuals and whole
families, tribes, and races succumbed. Primitive man was always
haunted by the specter of death from starvation. Civilization has freed
us from these perils. Human life is menaced day and night by innumerable dangers; it can be destroyed at any instant by natural forces
which are beyond control or at least cannot be controlled at the
present stage of our knowledge and our potentialities. But the horror
of starvation no longer terrifies people living in a capitalist society.
H e who is able to work earns much more than is needed for bare
sustenance.
There are also, of course, disabled people who are incapable of
work. Then there are invalids who can perform a small quantity of
work; but their disability prevents them from earning as much as
normal workers do; sometimes the wage rates they could earn are so
low that they couId not maintain themselves. These people can keep
body and soul together only if other people help them. T h e next of
kin, friends, the charity of benefactors and endowments, and communal poor relief take care of the destitute. Alms-folk do not cooperate in the social process of production; as far as the provision of
the means for the satisfaction of wants is concerned, they do not act;
they live because other people look after them. The problems of poor
relief are problems of the arrangement of consumption, not of the
arrangement of production activities. They are as such beyond the
frame of a theory of human action which refers only to the provision
of the means required for consumption, not to the way in which these
means are consumed. Catallactic theory deals with the method5
adopted for the charitable support of the destitute only as far as they
can possibly affect the supply of labor. It has sometimes happened that
the policies applied in poor relief have encouraged unwillingness to
work and the idleness of able-bodied adults.
7. In the last years of the eighteenth century, amidst the distress produced by
the rotracted war with France and the inflationary methods of financing it,
Eng and resorted to this makeshift (the Speenhamland system). The real aim was
to prevent agricultural workers from leaving their jobs and going into the
factories where they could earn more. The Speenhamland system was thus a
disguised subsidy for the landed gentry saving them the expense of higher wages.

P

Work and Wages

60 I

In the capitalist society there prevails a tendency toward a steady
increase in the per capita quota of capital invested. The accumulation of capital soars above the increase in popdation figures. Consequently the ~narginalproductivity of labor, wage rates, and the wage
earners' standard of living tend to rise continually. But this improvenlent in well-being is not the manifestation of the operation of an inevitable law of human evolution; it is a tendency resulting from the
interplay of forces which can freely produce their effects only under
capitalism. It is possible and, if we take into account the direction of
present-day policies, even not unlikely that capital consumption on the
one hand and an increase or an insufficient drop in population figures on
the other hand will reverse things. Then it could happen that men will
again learn literally what starvation means and that the relation of the
quantity of capital goods available and population figures will become
so unfavorablc as to make part of the workers earn less than a bare
subsistence. The mere approach to such conditions would certainly
cause irreconcilable dissensions within society, conflicts the violence
of which must result in a complete disintegration of all societal bonds.
T h e social division of labor cannot be preserved if part of the cooperating members of society are doomed to earn less than a bare
subsistence.
The notion of a physiological minimum of subsistence to which
the "iron law of wages" refers and which demagogues put forward
again and again is of no use for a catallactic theory of the determination of wage rates. One of the foundations upon which social cooperation rests is the fact that labor performed according to the
principle of the division of labor is so much more productive than
the efforts of isolated individuals that able-bodied people are not
troubled by the fear of starvation which daily threatened their forebears. Within a capitalist commonwealth the minimum of subsistence
plays no catallactic role.
Furthermore, the notion of a physiological minimum of subsistence
lacks that precision and scientific rigor which people have ascribed to
it. Primitive man, adjusted to a more animal-like than human existence,
could keep himself alive under conditions which are literally unbearable to his dainty scions pampered by capitalism. There is no such
thing as a physiologically and biologically determined minimum of
subsistence, valid for every specimen of the zoological species homo
sapiens. ATomore tenable is the idea that a definite quantity of calories
iq needed to keep a man healthy and progenitive, and a fukher definite
quantity to replace the energy expended in working. The appeal to
such notions of cattle breeding and the vivisection of guinea pigs does

602

Human Action

not aid the economist in his endeavors to comprehend the problems
of purposive human action. T h e "iron law of wages" and the essentially identical Marxian doctrine of the determination of "the value
of labor power" by "the working time necessary for its production,
consequently also for its reproduction," are the least tenable of all
that has ever been taught in the field of catallactics.
Yet it was possible to attach some meaning to the ideas implied in
the iron law of wages. If one sees in the wage earner merely a chattel
and believes that he plays no other role in society, if one assumes that
he aims at no other satisfaction then feeding and proliferation and
does not know of any employment for his earnings other than the
procurement of those animal satisfactions, one may consider the iron
law as a theory of the determination of wage rates. In fact the classical
economists, frustrated by their abortive value theory, could not think
of any other solution of the problem involved. For Torrens and
Ricardo the theorem that the natural price of labor is the price which
enables the wage earners to subsist and to perpetuate their race, without any increase or diminution, was the logically inescapable inference
from their untenable value theory. 13ut when fheir epigones saw that
they could no longer satisfy themselves with this manifestly preposterous law, they rcsorted to a modification of it which was tantamount to a complete abandonment of any attempt to provide an
economic explanation of the determination of wage rates. They tried
to preserve the cherished notion of the minimum of subsistence by
substituting the concept of a "social'' minimum for the concept of a
physioIogica1 minimum. They no longer spoke of the minimum required for the necessary subsistence of the laborer and for the preservation of an undiminished supply of labor. They spoke instead of the
minimum required for the preservation of a standard of living
sanctified by historical tradition and inhcrited customs and habits.
While daily experience taught impressively that under capitalism real
wage rates and the w-age earners' standard of living were steadily
rising, while it bccame from day to day more obvious that the traditional walIs separating the various strata of the population could no
longer be preserved, because the social improvement in the conditions
of the industrial workers demolished the vested ideas of social rank
and dignity, these doctrinaires announced that old customs and social
convention determine the height of wage rates. Only people blinded
8. Cf. Marx, Das Kapital (7th ed. Hamburg, 1 9 1 4 ) ~
I, 133. In the Communist
Manifesto (Section 11) Marx and Engels formulate their doctrine in this way:
"The average price of wage labor is the minimum wage, i.e., that quantum of
means of subsistence which is absolutely required to keep the laborer in bare existence as laborer." It "merely sufficesto prolong and reproduce a bare existence."

Work and Wages

603

by preconceived prejudices and party bias could resort to such an
explanation in an age in which industry supplies the consumption of
the masses again and again with new commodities hitherto unknown
and makes accessible to the average worker satisfactions of which no
king could dream in the past.
I t is not especially remarkable that the Prussian Historical School
of the wirtschaftliche Staatswissenschaften viewed w-age rates no less
than commodity prices and interest rates as "historical categories"
and that in dealing with wage ratcs it had recourse to the concept of
"income adequate to the individual's hierarchical station in the social
scale of ranks." It was the essence of the teachings of this school to
deny the existence of economics and to substitute history for it. But
it is amazing that Marx and the Marxians did not recognize that their
endorsement of this spurious doctrine entirely disintegrated the body
of the so-called Marxian system of economics. When the articles and
dissertations published in England in the early 'sixties convinced Marx
that it was no longer permissible to cling unswervingly to the wage
thcory of the classical economists, he modified his theory of the value
of labor power. H e declared that "the extent of the so-called natural
wants and the manner in which they are satisfied, are in themselves a
product of historical evolution" and "depend to a large extent on the
degree of civilization attained b y any given country and, among other
factors, especially on the conditions and customs and pretensions concerning the standard of life under which the class of free laborers
has been formed." Thus "a historical and moral element enter into
the determination of the value of labor power." But when Marx adds
that nonetheless "for a given country at any given time, the average
quantity of indisgensable necessaries of life is a given fact," "
he contradicts himself and misleads the reader. What he has in mind
is no longer the "indispensable necessaries," but the things considered
indispensable from a traditional point of view, the means necessary for
the preservation of a standard of living adequate to the workers'
station in the traditional social hicrarchy. T h e recourse to such an explanation means virtually the renunciation of any cconomic or catallactic elucidation of the determination of wage rates. Wagc rates are
explained as a datum of history. Thcy are no longer seen as a market
phenomenon, but as a factor originating outside of the interplay of the
forces operating on the market.
However, even those who believe that the height of wage ratcs as
9. Cf. Marx, Das Kapital, q; 134.Italics arc mine. The term used bv Marx which
in the text is translated as necessaries of life" is "Lebensmittel." The MuretSanders Dictionary (16th ed.) translates this term "articles of food, provisions,
victuals, grub!'

604
Human Action
they are actually paid and received in reality are forced upon the
~narketfrom without as a datum cannot avoid developing a theory
which explains the determination of wage rates as the outcome of
the valuations and decisions of the consumers. Without such a catallactic theory of wages, no economic analysis of the market can be
complcte and logically satisfactory. I t is simply nonsensical to restrict
the catallactic disquisitions t o the problems of the determination of
commodity prices and interest rates and to accept wage rates as a
historical datum. An economic theory worthy of the name must be
in a position to assert with regard to wage rates more than that they
are determined by a "historical and moral element." T h e characteristic mark of economics is that it explains the exchange ratios manifested in market transactions as market phenomena the determination
of which is subject to a regularity in the concatenation and sequence
of events. It is precisely this that distinguishes economic conception
from the historical understanding, theory from history.
W e can well imagine a historical situation in which the height of
wage rates is forced upon the market by the interference of external
compulsion and coercion. Such institutional fixing of wage rates is
one of the most important features of our age of interventionist
policies. But with regard to such a state of affairs it is the task of
econon~icsto investigate what effects are brought about by the disparity between the two wage rates, the potential rate which the unhampered market would have produced by the interplay of the supply
of and the demand for labor on the one hand, and on the other the rate
which external compulsion and coercion impose upon the parties to
the market transactions.
I t is true, wage earners are imbued with the idea that wages must
be at least high enough to enable them to maintain a standard of living
adequate to their station in the hierarchical gradation of society.
Every single worker has his particular opinion about the claims he
is entitled to raise on account of "status," "rank," "tradition," and
"cuscom" in the same way as he has his particuiar opinion about his
own efficiency and his own achievements. But such pretensions and
self-complacent assumptions are without any relevance for the determination of wage rates. They limit neither the upward nor the
downward movement of wage rates. T h e wage earner must sometimes
satisfy himself with much less than what, according to his opinion,
is adequate to his rank and efficiency. If he is offercd more than he
expected, he pockets the surplus without a qualm. T h e age of laissez
faire for which the iron law and Marx's doctrine of the historically
determined formation of wage rates claim validity witnessed a pro-

W o r k and Wages

605

gressive, although sometimes temporarily interrupted, tendency for
real wage rates to rise. The wage earners' standard of living rose to a
height unprecedented in history and never thought of in earlier
periods.
The labor unions pretend that nominal wage rates at least must always be raised in accordance with the changes occurring in the monetary unit's purchasing power in such a way as to secure to the wage
earner the unabated enjoyment of the previous standard of living.
They raise these claims also with regard to wartime conditions and
the measures adopted for the financing of war expenditure. In their
even in wartime neither inflation nor the withholding of
incorne taxes must affect. the worker's take-home real wage rates. This
doctrine tacitly implies the thesis of the Co~nmzcnistManifesto that
"the working men have no country" and have "nothing to lose but
their chains"; consequently they are neutral in the wars waged by
the bourgeois exploiters and do not care whether their nation conquers
or is conquered. It is not the task of economics to scrutinize these
statements. It only has to establish the fact that it does not matter
what kind of justification is advanced in favor of the enforcement of
wage rates higher than those the unhampered labor market would have
determined. If as a result of such claims real wage rates are really
raised above the height consonant with the marginal productivity
of the various types of labor concerned, the unavoidable consequences must appear without any regard to the underlying philosophyThe same is valid with regard to the confused doctrine that wage
earners arc entitled to claim for themselves all the benefits derived
frotn inlprovements in what union officers c a l the productivity of
labor. On the unhampered labor market wage rates always tend toward
the point at which they coincide with the marginal productivity of
labor. T h e concept of the productivity of labor in general is no less
empty than all other universal concepts of this kind, e.g., the concept
of ihe vahe of iron or gold iii general. TOy a k of &e productivity of
labor in a sense other than that of the marginal productivity is meaningless. What these union officershave in mind is an ethical justification
of their policies. However, the economic consequences of these
policies are not affected by the pretexts advanced in their favor.
Wage rates are ultimately determined by the value which the wage
earner's fellow citizens attach to his services and achievements. Labor
is appraised like a commodity not because the entrepreneurs and
capitalists are hardhearted and callous, but because they are unconditionally subject to the supremacy of the pitiless consumers. The con-

Work and W a g e s
are innate as well as acquired diversities in the abilities to perform
certain types of work. The innate faculties required for certain types
of work cannot be acquired by any training and schooling.
4. The capacity to work must be dealt with appropriately if it
is not to deteriorate or to vanish altogether. Special care is needed
to preserve a man's abilities-both the innate and the acquired-for
such a ~ e r i o das the unavoidable decline of his vital forces may permit.
5. As work approaches the point at which the total amount of work
a man can perform at the time is exhausted and the interpolation of a
period of recreation is indispensable, fatigue impairs the quantity and
the quality of the performance.lL
6. Men prefer the absence of labor, i.e., leisure, to labor, or as the
economists put it: they attach disutility to labor.
The self-sufficient man who works in economic isolation for the
direct satisfaction of his own needs only, stops working at the point
at which he begins to vaIue leisure, the absence of labor's disutility,
more highly than the increment in satisfaction expected from working more. Having satisfied his most urgent needs, he considers the
satisfaction of the still unsatisfied needs less desirable than the satisfaction of his striving after leisure.
T h e same is true for wage earners no less than for an isolated autarkic
worker. They too are not prepared to work untiI they have expended
the total capacity of work they are capabIe of expending. They too
are eager to stop working at the point at which the mediate gratification expected no longer outweighs the disutility involved in the performance of additional work.
Popular opinion, laboring under atavistic representations and
blinded by Marxian slogans, was slow in grasping this fact. It clung
and even today clings to the habit of looking at the wage earner as
a bondsman, and at wages as the capitalist equivalent of the bare
subsistence w-hich the slave owner and the cattle owner must provide
for their slaves and animals. In the eyes of this doctrine the wage
earner is a man whom poverty has forced to submit to bondage. The
vain formalism of the bourgeois lawyers, we are told, calls this subjection voluntary, and interprets the relation between employer and employee as a contract between two equal parties. In truth, however,
the worker is not free; he acts under duress; he must submit to the yoke
of virtual serfdom because as society's disinherited outcast no other
choice is left to him. Even his apparent right to choose his master is
I I. Other fluctuations in the quantity and quality of the performance per unit
of time-e.g., the lower efficiency in the period immediately following the resumption of work interrupted by recreation-are hardly of any importance for
the supply of labor on the market.

Human Action
spurious. The open or silent combination of the employers fixing the
conditions of employment in a uniform way by and large makes this
freedom illusory.
If one assumes that wages are merely the reimbursement of the
expenses incurred by the worker in the preservation and reproduction
of labor power or that their height is determined by tradition, it
is quite consistent to consider every reduction in the obligations which
the labor contract imposes on the worker as a unilateral gain for the
worker. If the height of wage rates does not depend on the quantity
and quality of the performance, if the employer does not pay to thk
worker the price the market assigns to his achievement, if the employer
does not buy a definite quantity and quality of workmanship, but
buys a bondsman, if wage rates are so low that for natural or "historical" reasons they cannot drop any further, one improves the wage
earner's lot by forcibly shortening the length of the working day.
Then it is permissible to look at the laws limiting the hours of work
as tantamount to the decrees by means of which European governments of the seventeenth, eighteenth, and early nineteenth centuries
step by step reduced and finally entirely abolished the amount of the
unpaid statute labor (corv6e) which the peasant bondsmen were liable
to give to their lords, or to ordinances lightening the work to be done
by convicts. Then the shortening of daily hours of work which the
evolution of c a p i t a h industrialism brought about is appraised as a
victory of the exploited wage-slaves over the rugged selfishness of
their tormentors. All laws imposing upon the employer the duty to
make definite expenditures to the benefit of the employees are described as "social gains," i.c., as liberalities for the attainment of which
the employees do not have to make any sacrjfice.
It is generally assumed that the correctness of this doctrine is
sufficiently demonstrated by the fact that the individual wage earner
has only a negligible influence on the determination of the terms
of the labor contract. The decisions concerning the length of the
working day, work on Sundays and holidays, the time set for meals
and many other things arc made by the employers without asking the
employees. The wage earner has no other choice than to yield to
these orders or to starve.
The cardinal fallacy involved in this reasoning has already been
pointed out in the preceding sections. The employers are not
asking for labor in general, but for men who are fitted to perform the
kind of labor they need. Just as an entrepreneur must choose for his
plants the most suitable location, equipment, and raw materials, so
he must hire the most efficientworkers. H e must arrange conditions of

Work and Wages
work in such a way as to make them appear attractive to those classes
of workers he wants to employ. I t is true that the individual worker
has but little to say with regard to these arrangements. They are,
like the height of wage rates itself, like commodity prices, and the
shape of articles produced for mass consumption, the product of
the interaction of innumerable people participating in the social
process of the market. They are as such mass phenomena which are
but little subject to modification on the part of a single individual.
However, it is a distortion of truth to assert that the individuaI voter's
ballot is without influence because many thousands or even millions
of votes are required to decide the issue and that those of people not
attached to any party virtually do not matter. Even if one wcre to
admit this thesis for the sake of argument, it is a non sequitur to infer
that the substitution of totalitarian principles for democratic procedures would make the officeholders more genuine representatives of
the people's will than election campaigns. T h e counterparts of these
totalitarian fables in the field of the market's economic democracy
are the assertions that the individual consumer is powerless against
the suppliers and the individual employee against the employers. It
is, of course, not an individual's taste, different from that of the
many, that determincs the features of articles of mass production designed for mass consumption, but the wishes and likes of the majority.
I t is not the individual job-seeker, but the masses of job-seekers whose
conduct determines the tcrms of the labor contracts prevailing in
definitc areas or branches of industry. If it is customary to have lunch
between noon and one o'cIock, an individual worker who prefers to
have it between two and three P.M. has little chance of having his
wishes satisfied. However, the social prcssure to which this solitary
individual is subject in this case is not exercised by the employe;,
but by his fellow employees.
Employers in their search for suitable workers are forced to accornmodate themselves even to serious and costly inconveniences if they
cannot find those nceded on other terms. In many countries, some of
them stigmatized as socially backward by the champions of anticapitalism, employers must yield t o various wishes of workers motivated by considerations of religious ritual or caste and status. They
must arrange hours of work, holidays, and many technical problems
according to such opinions, however hurdensome such an adjustment
may be. U7hcnever an empbyer asks for special pcrforrnances which
appear irksome or repulsive to the en~ployees,he must pay extra for
the excess of disutility the worker must expend.
T h e terms of the labor contract refer to all working conditions,

610

Hunzan Action

not merely to the height of wage rates. Teamwork in factories and the
interdependence of various enterprises make it impossible to deviate
from the arrangcments custonlary in the country or in the branch
concerned and thus result in a unification and standardizarion of these
arrangements. But this fact neither weakens nor eliminates the employees' contribution in their setting up. For the individual workers
they are, of course, an unalterable datum as the railroad's timetable
is for the individual traveler. But nobody would contend that in determining the timetable thc company does not bothcr about the wishes
of the potential customers. Its intention is precisely to serve as many
of them as possible.
T h e interpretation of the evolution of modern industrialism has
been utterly vitiated by the anticapitalistic bias of governments and
the masses and the allegedly prolabor writers and historians. T h e rise
in real wage rates, the shortening of hours of work, the elimination of
child labor, and the restriction of the labor of married women, it is
asserted, were the result of the interfercncc of governments and labor
unions and the pressure of public opinion aroused by humanitarian
authors. But for this interference and pressure the entrepreneurs and
capitalists would have retained for themselves all the advantages
derivcd from the increase in capital investment and the consequent
improvement in technological methods. The rise in the wage earners'
standard of living was thus brought about at the expense of the "unearned'' income of capitalists, cntreprencurs, and landowners. It is
highly desirable to continue these policies, benefiting the many at
the sole expense of a few selfish exploiters, and to reduce more and
more the unfair take of the propertied classes.
T h e incorrectness of this interpretation is obvious. All measures
restricting the supply of labor directly or indirectly burden the
capitalists as far as they increase the marginal productivity of labor
and reduce the marginal productivity of the material factors of production. As they restrict the supply of labor without reducing the
supply of capi&l, they increase the portion allotted to the wage
earners out of the total net produce of the production effort. But this
total net produce will drop too, and it depends on the specific data
of each case whether the relatively greater quota of a smaller cake
will be greater or smaller than the relatively smaller quota of a bigger
cake. T h e rate of interest and profits are not directly affected by
the shortening of the total supply of labor. T h e prices of material
factors of production drop and wage rates per unit of the individual
worker's performance (not necessarily also per capita of the workers
employed) rise. T h e prices of the products rise too. Whether all

Work and W a g e s

61I

these changes result in an improvement or in a deterioration of the
average wage earner's income is, as has been said, a question of fact in
each instance.
But our assumption that such measures do not affect the supply
of material factors of production is impermissible. T h e shortening
of the hours of work, the restriction of night work and of the employment of certain classes of people impair the utilization of a part
of the equipment available and are tantamount to a drop in the supply
of capital. T h e resulting intensification of the scarcity of capital goods
may entirely undo the potential rise in the marginal productivity of
labor as against the marginal productivity of capital goods.
If concomitantly with the compulsory shortening of the hours of
work the authorities or the unions forbid any corresponding reduction in wage rates which the state of the market: would require or if
previously prevailing institutions prevent such a reduction, the effects
appear whch every attempt to keep wage rates at a height above the
potential market rate brings about: institutional unemployment.
T h e history of capitalism as it has operated in the last two t~undred
years in the realm of Western civilization is the record of a steady
rise in the wage earners' standard of living. The inhercnt mark of
capitalism is that it is mass production for mass consumption directed
b y the most energetic and far-sighted individuals, unflaggingly aiming
at improvement. Its driving force is the profit-motive the instrumentality of which forces the businessman constantly to provide the consumers with more, better, and cheaper amenities. A n excess of profits
over losses can appear only in a progressing economy and only to the
extent to which the masses' standard of living i r n p r o v ~ s ? ~
Thus capitalism is the system under which the keenest and most agile minds are
driven to promote to the best of their abilities the welfare of the
laggard many.
In the field of historical experience it is impossible to resort to
measurement. As money is no yardstick of value and want-satisfaction,
it cannot be applied for comparing the standard of Iiving of people
in various periods of time. Howcver, all historians whose judgment
is not muddled by romantic prepossessions agree that the evolution
of capitalism has inultiplied capital equipment on a scale which far
exceeded the synchronous increase in population figures. Capital
equipment both per capita of the total population and pcr capita of
those abIc to work is immensely larger today than fifty, a hundred,
or two hundred years ago. ConcomitantIy there has been a tremendous increase in the quota which the wage earners receive out of the
I 2.

See above, pp. 292-296.

6 12

Hunzan Action

total amount of commodities produced, an amount which in itself
is much bigger than in the past. The ensuing rise in the masses'
standard of living is miraculous when compared with the conditions
of ages gone by. In those merry old days even the wealthiest people
led an existence which must be called straightened when compared
with the average standard of the American or Australian worker of
our age. Capitalism, says Marx, unthinkingly repeating the fables of
the eulogists of the Middle Ages, has an inevitable tendency to irnpoverish the workers more and more. The truth is that capitalism has
poured a horn of plenty upon the masses of wage earners who frequently did all they could to sabotage the adoption of those innovations which render their life more agreeable. How uneasy an American
worker would be if hc were forced to live in the manor of a medieval
lord and to miss the plumbing facilities and the other gadgets he simply
takes for granted!
The improvement in his material well-being has changed the worker's valuation of leisure. Better supplied with the amenities of life
as he is, he sooner reaches the point at which he looks upon any further
increment in the disutility of labor as an evil which is no longer outweighed by the expected further increment in labor's mediate gratitication. He is eager to shorten the hours of daily work and to spare
his wife and children the toil and trouble of gainful employment.
It is not labor legislation and labor-union pressure that have shortened
hours of work and withdrawn married women and children from
the factories; it is capitalism, which has made the wage earner so
prosperous that he is able to buy more leisure timc for himself arid
his dependents. The nineteenth century's labor legislation by and
large achieved nothing more than to provide a legal ratification for
changes which the interplay of market factors had brought about
previously. As far as it sometimes went ahead of industrial evolution,
the quick advance in wealth soon made things right again. As far as
the allegedly prolabor laws decreed measures which were not rnerely
the ratification of changes already effected or the anticipation of
changes to be expected in the immediate future, they hurt the material
interests of the workers.
T h e term "social gains" is utterly misleading. If the law forces
workers who would prefer to work forty-eight hours a week not to
give more than forty hours of work, or if i t forces employers to
incur certain expenses for the benefit of employees, it does not favor
workers at the expense of employers. Whatever the provisions of
a social security law may be, their incidence ultimately burdens the
employee, not the employer. They affect the amount of take-home

Work and Wages
wages; if they raise the price the employer has to pay for a unit of
performance above the potential market rate, they create institutional
unemployment. Social security does not enjoin upon the employers
the obligation to expend more in buying labor. It imposes upon the
wage earners a restriction concerning the spending of their total income. It curtails the worker's freedom to arrange his household according to his own decisions.
Whether such a system of social security is a good or a bad policy
is essentially a poIitical problem. One may try to justify it by declaring
that the wage earners lack the insight and the moral strength to
provide spontaneously for their own future. But then it is not easy
to silence the voices of those who ask whether it is not paradoxical
to entrust the nation's welfare to the decisions of voters whom the
law itself considers incapable of managing their own affairs; whether
it is not absurd to make those people supreme in the conduct of
government who are manifestly in need of a guardian to prevent them
from spending their own income foolishly. Is it reasonable to assign
to wards the right to elect their guardians? It is no accident that Germany, the country that inaugurated the social security system, was the
cradle of both varicties of modern disparagement of democracy, the
Marxian as well as the non-A4arxian.

Rewzarks About the Popular Interpetation
of the "Industrial Revolution"
It is generally asserted that the history of modern industrialism and
especially the history of the British "Industrial Revolution" provide an
empirical verification of the "realistic" or "institutional" doctrine and
utterly explode the "abstract" dogmatism of the economists.13
T h e economists flatly deny that labor unions and government prolabor
legislation can and did lastinel benefit the whole class of wage earners
.a.y
and raise their standard of hvmg. But the facts, say the anti-economists,
have refuted these fallacies. T h e statesman and legislators who enacted the
factory acts displayed a better insight into reality than the economists.
While laissez-faire philosophy, without pity and compassion, taught that
the sufferings of the toiling masses are unavoidable, the commonsense of
I 3. The attribution of the phrase "the Industrial Revolution" to the reigns of
the two last Hanoverian Georges was the outcome of deliberate attempts to
melodramatize econo~nichistory in order to fit it into the Procrustean Marxian
schemes. The transition from medieval methods of production to those of the free
enterprise system was a long process that started centuries before 1760 and, even
in England, was not finished in 1830.Yet, it is true that England's industrial
development was considerably accelerated in the second half of the eighteenth
century. It is therefore permissible to use the term "Industrial Revolution" in the
examination of the emotional connotations with which Fabianism, Marxism, the
Historical School, and Institutionalism have loaded it.

614

Human Action

laymen succeeded in quelling the worst excesses of profit-seeking business.
The improvement in the conditions of the workers is entirely an achievement of governments and labor unions.
Such are the ideas permeating most of the historical studies dealing with
the evolution of modern industrialism. The authors begin by sketching an
idyllic image of conditions as they prevailed on the eve of the "Industrial
Revolution." At that time, they tell us, things were, by and large, satisfactory. The peasants were happy. So also were the industrial workers
under the domestic system. They worked in their own cottages and enjoyed a certain economic independence since they owned a garden plot
and their tools. But then "the Industrial Revolution fell like a war or a
plague" on these people.14 The factory system reduced the free worker t o
virtual slavery; it lowered his standard of living to the level of bare subsistence; in cramming women and children into the mills it destroyed
family life and sapped the very foundations of society, morality, and public
health. A small minority of ruthless exploiters had cleverly succeeded in
imposing their yoke upon the immense majority.
T h e truth is that economic conditions were highly unsatisfactory on the
eve of the Industrial Kevolution. The traditional social system was not
elastic enough to provide for the needs of a rapidly increasing population.
Neither farming nor the guilds had any use for the additional hands. Business was imbued with the inherited spirit of privilege and exclusive monopoly; its institutional foundations were licenses and the grant of a patent of
monopoly; its philosophy was restriction and the prohibition of competition both domestic and foreign. The number of people for whom there
was no room left in the rigid system of paternalism and government tutelage of business grew rapidly. They werc virtually outcasts. The apathetic
majority of these wretched people lived from the crumbs that fell from
the tables of the established castes. In the harvest season they earned a trifle
by occasional help on farms; for the rest they depended upon private
charity and communal poor relief. Thousands of the most vigorous youths
of these strata were pressed into the service of the Royal Army and Navy;
many of them were killed or maimed in action; many more perished ingloriously from the hardships of the barbarous discipline, from tropical
diseases, or from syphilis.15 Other thousands, the boldest and most ruthless
of their class, infested the country as vagabonds, beggars, tramps, robbers,
and prostitutes. The authorities did not know of any means to cope with
these individuals other than the poorhouse and the workhouse. The support the government gave to the popular resentment against the introduction of new inventions and labor-saving devices made things quite hopeless.
The factory system developed in a continuous struggle against innumerIA. 1. L. Hammond and Barbara Hammond, The Skilled Labourer 1760-1832
(rd'ed. London, ~gzo),p,4.
15. In the Seven Years War 1,512British seamen were killed in battle while
I 33,708 died of disease or were missing. Cf. W. L. Dorn, Competition for Empire

Work and Wages
able obstacles. It had to fight popular prejudice, old established customs,
legally binding rules and regulations, the animosity of the authorities, the
vested interests of privileged groups, the envy of the guilds. The capital
equipment of the individual firms was insufficient, the provision of credit
extremely difficult and costly. Technological and commercial experience
was lacking. Most factory owners failed; comparatively few succeeded.
Profits were sometimes considerable, but so were losses. I t took many
decades until the common practice of reinvesting the greater part of profits
earned accumulated adequate capital for the conduct of affairs on a broader
scale.
That the factories couId thrive in spite of all these hindrances was due to
two reasons. First there were the teachings of the new social philosophy
expounded by the economists. They demolished the prestige of Mercantilism, paternalism, and restrictionism. They exploded the superstitious belief that labor-saving devices and processes cause unemployment and reduce all people to poverty and decay. The laissez-faire economists were the
pioneers of the unprecedented technological achievements of the last
two hundred years.
Then there was another factor that weakened the opposition to innovations. The factories freed the authorities and the ruling landed aristocracy
from an embarrassing problem that had grown too large for them. They
provided sustenance for the masses of paupers. They emptied the poor
houses, the workhouses, and the prisons. They converted starving beggars
into self-supporting breadwinners.
The factory owners did not have the power to compel anybody to take
a factory job. They could only hire people who were ready to work for
the wages offered to them. Low as these wage rates were, they were nonetheless much more than these paupers could earn in any other field open to
them. It is a distortion of facts to say that the factories carried off the
housewives from the nurseries and the kitchens and the children from their
play. These women had nothing t o cook with and to feed their children.
These children were destitute and starving. Their only refuge was the
factory. It saved them, in the strict sense of the term, from death by starvation.
It is deplorable that such conditions existed. But if one wants to blame
those responsible, one must not blame the factory owners who-driven by
selfishness, of course, and not by "altruismn-did all they could to eradicate the evils. What had caused these evils was the economic order of the
precapitalistic era, the order of the "good old days."
In the first decades of the Industrial Revolution the standard of living
of the factory workers was shockingly bad when compared with the contemporary conditions of the upper classes and with the present conditions
of the industrial masses. Hours of work were long, the sanitary conditions
in the workshops deplorable. The individual's capacity to work was used
up rapidly. But the fact remains that for the surplus population which the
enclosure movement had reduced to dire wretchedness and for which

616

Human Action

there was literally no room left in the frame of the prevailing system of
production, work in the factories was salvation. These people thronged
into the plants for no reason other than the urge to improve their standard
of living.
T h e laissez-faire ideology and its offshoot, the "Industrial Revolution,"
blasted the ideological and institutional barriers to progress and welfare.
They demolished the social order in which a constantly increasing number
of peopIe were doomed to abject need and destitution. The processing
trades of earlier ages had almost cxclusively catered to the wants of the
well-to-do. Their expansion was limited by the amount of luxuries the
wealthier strata of the population could afford. Those not engaged in the
production of primary commodities could earn a living only as far as thc
upper classes were disposed to utilize their skill and services. But now a
different principle came into operation. The factory system inaugurated a
new mode of marketing as well as of production. Its characteristic feature
was that the manufactures were not designed for the consumption of a few
well-to-do only, but for the consumption of those who had hitherto played
but a negligible role as consumers. Cheap things for the many, was the
objective of the factory system. Thc classical factory of the early days of
the Industrial Revolution was the cotton mill. Now, the cotton goods it
turned out were not something the rich were asking for. These wealthy
people clung to silk, linen, and cambric. U'henevcr the factory with its
methods of mass production by means of power-drivcn machines invaded
a new branch of production, it started with the production of cheap goods
for the broad masses. The factories turned to the production of more refined and therefore more expensive goods only at a later stage, when the
unprecedented improvement in the masses' standard of living which they
caused made it profitable to apply the methods of mass production also
to these better articles. Thus, for instance, the factory-made shoe was for
many years bought only b y the "proletarians" while the wealthier consumers continued to patronize the custom shoemakers. The much talked,
about sweatshops did not produce clothes for the rich, but for people in
modest circumstances. T h e fashionable ladies and gentlemen preferred and
still do prefer custom-made frocks and suits.
T h e outstanding fact about the Industrial Revolution is that it opened
an age of mass product~onfor the needs of the masses. The wage earners
are no longer people toiling rncrcly for other people's well-being. They
themselves are the main consumers of thc products the factories turn out.
Big business dcpcnds upon mass consumption. There is, in present-day
America, not a single branch of big business that would not cater to the
needs of the masses. The very principle of capitalist entrepreneurship is to
provide for the common man. In his capacity as consumer the common
man is the sovereign whose buying or abstention from buying decides the
fate of entrepreneurial activitics. There is in the market economy no other
means of acquiring and preserving wealth than by supplying the masses
in the best and cheapest way with all the goods they ask for.

W o r k nnd W a g e s
Blinded b y their prejudices, many historians and writers have entirely
failed to recognize this fundamental fact. As they see it, wage earners toil
for the benefit of other people. They never raise the question who these
"other" people are.
Mr. and Mrs. Hammond tell us that the workers were happier in 1760
than they were in 1830.'~This is an arbitrary value judgment. There is no
means of comparing and measuring the happiness of different people and
of the same people at different times. W e may agree for the sake of argument that an individual who was born in I 740 was happier in 1760 than in
I 830. But let us not forget that in I 770 (according to the estimate of Arthur
Young) England had 8.5 million inhabitants, while in 1831 (according to
the census) the figure was 16 million.l7 This conspicuous increase was
mainly conditioned by the Industrial Revolution. With regard to these
additional Englishmen the assertion of the eminent historians can only be
approved by those who endorse the melancholy verses of Sophocles: "Not
to be born is, beyond all question, the best; but when a man has once seen
the light of day, this is next best, that speedily he should return to that
place whence he came."
T h e early industrialists were for the most part men who had their
origin in the same social strata from which their workers came. They lived
very modestly, spent only a fraction of their earnings for their households
and put the rest back into the business. But as the entrepreneurs grew
richer, the sons of successful businessmen began to intrude into the circles
of the ruling class. T h e highborn gentlemen envied the wealth of the
parvenus and resented their sympathies with the reform movement. They
hit back by investigating the material and moral conditions of the factory
hands and enacting factory legislation.
The history of capitalism in Great Britain as well as in all other capitalist
countries is a record of an unceasing tendency toward the improvement
in the wage earners' standard of living. This evolution coincided with the
developn~entof prolabor legislation and the spread of labor unionism on
the one hand and with the increase in the marginal productivity of labor
on the other hand. T h e economists assert that the improvement in the
workers' material conditions is due to the increase in the per capita quota
of capital invested and the technological achievements which the employment of this additional capital brought about. As far as labor legislation and
union pressure did not exceed the limits of what the workers would have
got without them as a necessary consequence of the acceleration of capital
accumulation as compared with population, they were superfluous. As far
as they exceeded these limits, they were harmful to the interests of the
masses. They delayed the accumulation of capital thus slowing down the
tendency toward a rise in the marginal productivity of labor and in wage
rates. They conferred privileges on some groups of wage earners at the
16. J. L. Hammond and Barbara Hammond, loc. cit.

17. F. C . Dietz, An Economic History of England (New York, r942), pp. 279
and 392.

61 8

Hzman Action

expense of other groups. They created mass uncmployment and decreased
the amount of products available for the workers in their capacity as consumers.
T h e apologists of government intcrfcrcnce with business and of labor
unionism ascribe all the improvements in the conditions of the workers
to the actions of governments and unions. Except for them, they contend,
the workers' standard of living would be no higher today than it was in the
early years of thc factory system.
It is obvious that this controversy cannot be settlcd by appeal to historical experience. With regard to the establishment of the facts thcre is no disagreement between the two groups. Their antagonism concerns the interpretation of events, and this interpretation must be guided by the theory
chosen. The epistemological and logical considerations which detcrrnine
the correctncss or incorrectness of a theory are logicallp and temporally
antecedent to the elucidation of the historical problenl involved. The historical facts 3s such neither prove nor disprove any theory. They need to
be interpreted in the light of theoretical insight.
Most of the authors who u-rote the history of thc conditions of labor
under capitalism were ignorant of economics and boasted of this ignorance.
However, this contempt for sound economic reasoning did not mean that
they approached the topic of their studies without prepossession and
without bias in favor of any thcory. They were guided by the popular
fallacies concerning governn~entalomnipotence and the alleged blessings
of labor unionism. It is beyond question that the Webbs as well as Lujo
Brentano arid a host of minor authors were at the very start of their
studies imbued with a fanatical dislike of the market economy and an
enthusiastic endorsement of the doctrines of socialism and interventionism.
They were certainly honest and sincere in their convictions and tried to
do their best. Their candor and probity exonerates them as individuals; it
does not exonerate them as historians. However pure the intentions of a
historian may be, there is no excuse for his recourse to fallacious doctrines.
The first duty of a historian is to examine with the utmost care all the
doctrines to which he resorts in dealing with the subject matter of his
work. If he neglects to do this and na'ively espouses the garbled and confused ideas of popular opinion, he is not a historian but an apologist and
propagandist.
T h e antagonism between the two opposite points of view is not merely a
historical problem. It refers no less to the most burning problems of the
present day. It is the matter of controversy in what is called in present-day
America the problem of industrial relations.
Let us stress one aspect of the matter only. Vast areas-Eastern Asia, the
East Indics, Southern and Southeastern Europc, Latin America-arc only
superficially affectcd by modern capitalism. Conditions in these countries
by and large do not differ from those of England on the eve of the "lndustrial Revolution." There are rnillions and millions of people for whom
there is no secure place left in the traditional economic setting. The fate

Work and W a g e s

619

of these wretched masses can be improved only by industrialization. What

they need most is entrepreneurs and capitalists. As their own foolish
policies have deprived these nations of the further enjoyment of the assistance imported forcign capital hitherto gave them, they must embark
upon domestic capital accumulation. They must go through all the stages
through which the evolution of Westcrn industrialism had to pass. They
must start with comparatively low wage rates and long hours of work.
But, deluded by the doctrines prevailing in present-day Western Europe
and North America, their statesmen think that they can proceed in a
different way. They encourage labor-union pressure and alleged prolabor
legislation. Their interventionist radicalism nips in the bud all attempts to
create domestic industries. These men do not comprehend that industrialization cannot begin with the adoption of the precepts of the International
Labor Ofice and the principles of the American Congress of Industrial
Organizations. Their stubborn dogmatism spells the doom of the Indian
and Chinese coolies, the Mexican peons, and millions of other peoples,
desperately struggling on the verge of starvation.

8. ?Vage Rates as Affected by the Vicissitudes
of t h e Market
Labor is a factor of production. T h e price which the scllcr of labor
can obtain on the market dcpends on the data of the markct.
The quantity and the quaIity of labor which an individual is fittcd
t o deliver is determined b y his innate and acquired characteristics.
T h e innate abilities cannot be altcred b y any purposeful conduct.
T h e y are the individual's heritage with which his anccstors have
endowed him on the day of his birth. H e can bestow care upon these
gifts and cultivate his taicnts, he can keep thcm from prematurely
withering away; but he can never cross the boundaries which nature
has drawn to his forces and abilities. He can display more or less skill
in his endeavors to sell his capacity to work at the highest price which
is obtainable on the market under prevailing conditions; but he cannor
change his nature in order to adjust it better t o the state of the marltet
data. It is good luck for him if marltet conditions are such that a kind
of labor which hc is able t o perform is lavishly remuncrated; it is
chance, not personal merit if his innate talents are highly appreciated
b y his fellow men. Miss Greta Garbo, if she had lived a hundred years
earlier, would probably have earned rnuch Jess than she did in this age
of moving. picturcs. As far as her innate taIents are concerned, she is
in a position similar to that of a farmer whose farm can be sold ar
a high price because the expansion of a ncighboring city converted it
into urban soiI.

620

Human Action

Within the rigid limits drawn by his innate abilities, a man's capacity
to work can be perfected by training for the accomplishment of
definite tasks. T h e individual-or his parents-incurs expenses for
a training the fruit of which consists in the acquisition of the ability
to perform certain kinds of work. Such schooling and training intensify a man's one-sidedness; they make him a specialist. Every special
training enhances the specific character of a man's capacity to uvork.
'The toil and trouble, the disutility of the efforts to which an individual
must submit in order to acquire these special abilities, the loss of potential earnings during the training period, and the money expenditure
required arc laid out in the expectation that the later increment in
earnings will compensate for them. Thcse expenses are an investment
and as such speculative. It depends on the future state of the market
whether or not they- mill pay. In training himself the worker becomes
a speculator and cntrcpreneur. T h e future state of the market will
determine whether profit o r loss results from his investment.
Thus the wage earner has vested interests in a twofold sense as a
man with definite innate qualities and as a man who has acquired
definite special skills.
T h e wage earner sells his labor on the market at the price which the
market allows for it today. In the imaginary construction of the evenly
rotating economy the sum of the prices which the entrepreneur must
expend for all the complementary factors of production together
must equal-due consideration being made for time preference-the
price of the product. In the changing economy changes in the market
structure may bring about differences between these two magnitudes.
'The ensuing profits and losses do not affect the wage earner. Their
incidence falls upon the employer alone. T h e uncertainty of the futurc
affects the employee only as far as the following items are concerned:
1. The expenses incurred in time, disutility, and money for training.
2 . 'The expenses incurred in moving to a definite place of work.
;. i n case of a labor conrracr: scipuiared for a definite period of
time, changes in the price of the specific type of labor occurring
in the meantime and changes in the employer's solvency.

9. The Labor Market
Wages are the prices paid for the factor of production, human
labor. As is the case with all the other prices of complementary factors
of production thcir height is ultimately determined by the prices of
the products as they are expected at the instant the labor is sold and

Work and Wages
bought. It does not matter whether he who performs the labor sells
his services to an employer who combines them with the material
factors of production and with the services of other people or whether
he himself embarks upon his own account and peril upon these acts
of combination. The final price of labor of the same quality is at any
rate the same in the whole market system. Wage rates are always
equal to the price of the full produce of labor. 'l'hc popular slogan
"the worker's right to the full produce of labor" was an absurd formulation of the claim that the consumers' goods should be distributed
exclusively among the workers and nothing should be left to the
entrepreneurs and the owners of the material factors of production.
From no point of view whatever can artifacts be considered as the
products of mere labor. T h e y are the yield of a purposive combination
of labor and of material factors of production.
In the changing economy there prevails a tendency for market
wage rates to adjust themselves precisely to the state of the final wage
rates. This adjustment is a tirne-absorbing process. T h e length of
the period of adjustment dcpends on the time required for the training
for new jobs and for the removal of workers to new places of residence. I t depends furthermore on subjective factors, as for instance
the workers' familiarity with the conditions and prospects of the
labor market. T h e adjustment is a speculative venture as far as the
training for new jobs and the change of residence involve costs which
are expended only- if one believes that the future state of the labor
market will make them appear profitable.
With regard to all these things there is nothing that is peculiar to
labor, wages, and the labor market. W h a t gives a particular feature
to the labor market is that the worker is not merely the purveyor
of the factor of production labor, but also a human being and that it
is impossible to sever the man from his performance. Reference to
this fact has been mostly used for extravagant utterances and for a
vain critique of the economic teachings concerning wage rates. HOWever, these absurdities must not prevent economics from paying adequate attention to this primordial fact.
For the worker it is a matter of consequence what kind of labor
he performs among the various kinds he is able to perform, where he
performs it, and under what particular conditions and circumstances.
An unaffected observer mav consider empty or even ridiculous
prejudices the ideas and feeiings that actuate a worker to prefer
certain jobs, certain places of work, and certain conditions of labor
t o others. However, such academic judgments of unaffected censors
are of no avail. For an economic treatment of the problems involved

622

Huvzan Action

there is nothing especially remarkable in the fact that the worlter looks
upon his toil and trouble not only from the point of view of the disutility of labor and its mediate gratification, but also takes into account
whether the special conditions and circumstances of its performance
interfere with his enjoyment of life and to what extent. T h e fact that
a worker is ready to forego the chance to increase his money earnings
by migrating to a place he considers less desirable and prefers to remain in his native place or country is not more remarkable than the
fact that a wealthy gentleman of no occupation prefers the more ex~ e n s i v clife in the capital to the cheaper life in a small town. T h e
worker and the consumer are the same person; it is merely economic
reasoning that integrates the social functions and splits up this unity
into two schemes. Men cannot sever their decisions concerning the
utilization of their working power from those concerning the enjoyment of their earnings.
Descent, language, education, religion, mentality, family bonds, and
social environment tie the worker in such a way that he does not choose
the place and the branch of his work merely with regard to the height
of wage rates.
W e may call that height of wage rates for definite types of labor
which would prevail on the market if the workers did not discriminate
between various places and, wage rates being equal, did not prefer
one working place to another, standard wage rates (S). If, however,
the wage earners, out of the above-mentioned considerations, value
differently work in different places, the height of market wage rates
(M) can permanently deviate from the standard rates. W e may call
the maximum difference between the market rate and the sta&ard
rate which does not yet result in the migration of workers from the
places of lower market wage rates to those of higher market wage
rates the attachment component ( A ) .T h e attachment component of
a definite geographical place or area is either positive or negative.
W e must furthermore take into account that the various places
and areas differ with regard to provision with consumer? goods as
far as transportation costs (in the broadest sense of the term) are concerned. These costs are lower in some areas, higher in other areas.
Then there are differences with regard to the physical input required
for the attainment of the same amount of physical satisfaction. In
some places a man must expend more in order to attain the same degree
of want-satisfaction which, apart from the circumstances determining
the amount of the attachment component, he could attain elsewhere
more cheaply. On the other hand, a man can in some places avoid
certain expenses without any impairment of his want-satisfaction

Work and Wages
while renunciation of these expenses would curtail his satisfaction in
other places. W e may call the expenses which a worker must incur
in certain places in order to attain in this sense the same degree of
want-satisfaction, or which he can spare without curtailing his wantsatisfaction, the cost component (C). The cost component of a
definite geographical place or area is either positive or negative.
If we assume that there are no institutional barriers preventing or
penalizing the transfer of capital goods, workers, and commodities
from one place or area to another and that the workers are indifferent
with regard to their dwelling and working places, there prevails a
tendency toward a distribution of population over the earth's surface
in accordance with the physical productivity of the primary natural
factors of production and the immobilization of inconvertible factors
of production as effecred in the past. There is, if we disregard the
cost component, a tendency toward an equalization of wage rates for
the same type of work all over the earth.
It would be permissible to call an area comparatively overpopulated
if in it market wage rates plus the (positive or negative) cost component are lower than the standard ratcs, and comparatively underpopulated if in it market wage rates plus the (positive or negative) cost
component are higher than the standard rates. But it is not expedient to
resort to such a definition of the terms involved. It does not help us
in explaining the real conditions of the formation of wage rates
and the conduct of wage earners. It is more expedient to choose another definition. W e may call an area comparatively overpopulated
if in it market wage rates are lower than the standard rates plus both
the (positive or negative) attachment component and the (positive or
negative) cost component. thar: is where M < ( S A $ C). Accordingly an area is to be called comparatively underpopulated in
C). I n the absence of institutional migration
which M > (S $ A
barriers workers move from the comparatively overpopulated areas
to the comparatively underpopulated until everywhere M = S
A C.
The same is true, mutatis mutandis, for the migration of individuals
working on their own account and selling their labor in disposing of
its products or in rendering personal services.
The concepts of the attachment component and the cost component
apply in the same way to shifting from one branch of business or occupation to another.
It is hardly necessary to observe that the migrations which these
theorems describe come to pass only in so far as there are no institutional barriers to the mobility of capital, labor, and commodities. In

+

+

+

+

624
Human Action
this age aiming at the disintegration of the international division of
labor and at each sovereign nation's economic self-sufficiency, the
tendencies they describe are operative only within each nation's
boundaries.

The W o r k of Animals and of Slaves
For man, animals are a material factor of production. It may be that one
day a change in moral sentiments will induce people to treat animals more
gently. Yet, as far as men do not leave the animals alone and let them go
their way, they will always deal with them as mere objects of their own
acting. Social cooperation can exist only between human beings because
only these are able to attain insight into the meaning and the advantages of
the division of labor and of peaceful cooperation.
Man subdues the animal and integrates it into his scheme of action as a
material thing. In taming, domesticating, and training animals man often
displays appreciation for the creature's psychologicaI peculiarities; he appeals, as it were, to its soul. But even then the gulf that separates man from
animal remains unbridgeable. An animal can never get anything else than
satisfaction of its appetites for food and sex and adequate protection against
injury resulting from environmental factors. Animals are bestial and inhuman precisely because they are such as the iron law of wages imagined
workers to be. As human civiiization wouId never have emerged if men
were exclusively dedicated to feeding and mating, so animals can neither
consort in social bonds nor participate in human society.
People have tried to look upon fellow men as they look upon animals and
to deal with them accordingly. They have used whips to compel galley
slaves and barge haulers to work like capstan-horses. However, experience
has shown that these methods of unbridled brutalization render very unsatisfactory results. Even the crudest and dullest people achieve more when
working of their own accord than under the fear of the whip.
Primitive man makes no distinction between his property in women,
children, and slaves on the one hand and his property in cattle and inanimate things on the other. But as soon as he begins to expect from his slaves
services other than such as can also be rendered by draft and pack animals,
he is forced to loosen their chains. H e must try to substitute the incentive
of self-interest for the incentive of mere fear; he must try to bind the slave
to himself by human feelings. If the slave is no longer prevented from fleeing exclusively by being chained and watched and no longer forced to
work exclusively under the threat of being whipped, the relation between
master and slave is transformed into a social nexus. The slave may, especially if the memory of happier days of freedom is still fresh, bemoan his
misfortune and hanker after liberation. But he puts up with what seems to
be an inevitable state of affairs and accommodates himself to his fate in
such a way as to make it as bearable as possible. The slave becomes intent
upon satisfying his master through application and carrying out the tasks

Work and Wages
entrusted to him; the master becomes intent upon rousing the slave's zeal
and loyalty through reasonable treatment. There develop between lord
and drudge familiar relations which can properly be called friendship.
Perhaps the eulogists of slavery were not entirely wrong when they
asserted that many slaves were satisfied with their station and did not aim
at changing it. There are perhaps individuals, groups of individuals, and
even whole peoples and races who enjoy the safety and security provided
b y bondage; who, insensible of humiliation and mortification, are glad to
pay with 3 moderate amount of labor for the privilege of sharing in the
amenities of a well-to-do household; and in whose eyes subjection to the
whims and bad tempers of a master is only a minor evil or no evil at all.
Of course, the conditions under which the servile workers toiled in big
farms and plantations, in mines, in workshops, and galleys were very different from the idyllically described gay life of domestic valets, chambermaids. cooks. and nurses and from the conditions of unfree laborers, dairy,
maids, herdsmen, and shepherds of small farming. hro apologist of slavery
was bold enough to glorify the lot of the Roman agricultural slaves, chained
and crammed together in the ergastulum, or of the Negroes of the American cotton and sugar plantations.'*
The abolition of slaverv and serfdom is to be attributed neither to the
teachings of theologians and moralists nor to weakness or generosity on the
part of the masters. There were among the teachers of religion and ethics
as many eloquent defenders of bondage as opponents.lg Servile labor disappeared because it could not stand the competition of free labor; its unprofitability sealed its doom in the market economy.
T h e price paid for the purchase of a slave is determined by the net
yield expected from his employment (both as a worker and as a progenitor
of other slaves) just as the price paid for a cow is determined by the net
yield expected from its utilization. T h e owner of a slave does not pocket a
specific revenue. For him there is no "exploitation" boon derived from
the fact that the slave's work is not remunerated and that the potential
market price of the services he renders is possibly greater than the cost of
feeding, sheltering, and guarding him. H e who buys a slave must in the
price paid make good for these economies as far as they may be expectcd;
he pays for them in full, due allowance being made for time preference.
---.
whether the proprietor employs the slave in his own household or enterprise or rents his services to other people, he does not enjoy any specific
advantage from the existence of the institution of slavery. The specific
boon goes totally to the slave-hunter, i.e., the man who deprives free men
18. Margaret Mitchell, who in her popular novel Gone With the Wind (New
York, 1936) eulogizes the South's slavery system, is cautious enough not to enter
into particulars concerning the plantation hands, and prefers to dwell upon the
conditions of domestic servants, who even in her account appear as an aristocracy
of their caste.
19. Cf. about the American proslavery doctrinc Charles and Mary Heard, T h e
Rise of American Civilization (rg44), I , 703-710; and C. E. Mcrriam, A History of
American I'olitical Theories (New York, ~gzq),pp. 227-251,

626

Human Action

of their liberty and transforms them into slaves. But, of course, the profitability of the slave-hunter's business depends upon the height of the prices
buyers are ready to pay for the acquisition of slaves. If these prices drop
below the operation and transportation costs incurred in the business of
slavc-hunting, business no longer pays and must be discontinued.
Now, at no time and at no place was it possible for enterprises employing servile labor to compete on the market with enterprises employing free
labor. Servile labor could always be utilized only where it did not have to
meet the competition of free labor.
If one treats men like cattle, one cannot squeeze out of them more than
cattle-like performances. But it then becomes significant that man is physically weaker than oxen and horses and that feeding and guarding a slave
is, in proportion to the performance to be reaped, more expensive than
feeding and guarding cattle. When treated as a chattel, man renders a
smaller yield per unit of cost expended for current sustenance and guarding than domestic animals. If one asks from an unfree laborer human pcrformances, one must provide him with specifically human inducements. If
the employer aims at obtaining products which in quality and quantity
excel those whose production can be extorted by the whip, he must interest
the toiler in the yield of his contribution. Instead of punishing laziness and
sloth, he must reward diligence, skill, and eagerness. But whatever he may
try in this respect, he will never obtain from a bonded worker, i.e., a
worker who does not reap the full market price of his contribution, a performance equal to that rendered by a freeman, i.e., a man hired on the
unhampered labor market. The upper limit beyond which it is impossible
to lift the quality and quantity of the products and services rendered by
slave and serf labor is far below the standards of free labor. In the production of articles of superior quality an enterprise employing the apparently cheap labor of unfree workers can never stand the competition of
enterprises crnploying free labor. It is this fact that has made all systems of
compulsory labor disappear.
Social institutions once made whole areas or branches of production
reservations exclusively kept for the occupation of unfree labor and
sheltered against any competition on the part of entrepreneurs employing
free men. Slavery and serfdom thus became essential features of a rigid
caste system that could be neither removed nor modified by the actions of
individuals. Wherever conditions were different, the slave owners themselves resorted to measures which were bound to abolish, step by step, the
whole system of unfree labor. It was not humanitarian feelings and
clemency that induced the callous and pitiless slaveholders of ancient
Rome to loosen the fetters of their slaves, but the urge to derive the best
possible gain from their property. They abandoncd the system of centralized big-scale management of thcir vast landholdings, the latifundia, and
transformed the slaves into virtual tenants cultivating thcir tenements on
their own account and owing to the landlord merely either a lease or a
share of the yield. In the processing trades and in commerce the slaves be-

W o r k and W a g e s
came entrepreneurs and their funds, the peculium, their legal quasiproperty. Slaves were manumitted in large numbers because the freedman
rendered to the former owner, the patronus, services more valuable than
those to be expected from a slave. For the manumission was not an act of
grace and a gratuitous gift on the part of the owner. It was a credit operatlon, a purchase of freedom on the installment plan, as it were. The frcedman was bound to render the former owner for many years or even for a
lifetime definite payments and services. The patronus moreover had
special rights of inheritance to the estate of the deceased freedrnan.?O
With the disappearance of the plants and farms employing unfree
laborers, bondage ceased to be a system of production and became a
political privilege of an aristocratic caste. The overlords were entitled to
definite tributes in kind or money and to definite services on the part of
their subordinates; moreover their serf's children were obliged to serve
them as servants or military retinue for a dcfinite length of time. But the
underprivileged peasants and artisans operated their farms and shops
o n their own account and peril. Only when thcir processes of production were accomplished did the lord step in and claim a part of the proceeds.
Later, from the sixteenth century on, people again began to employ unfree workers in agricultural and even sometimes in industrial big-scale production. In the American colonies Kegro slabery becarne the standard
method of the plantations. In Eastern Europe-in Northeastern Germany,
in Bohemia and its annexes Moravia and Silesia, in Poland, in the Baltic
countries, in Russia, and also in Hungary and its anncxcs-big-scale farming was built upon the unlimited statute labor of serfs. Both these systems
of unfree labor were sheltered by poIitical institutions against the competition of enterprises employing free workers. In the plantation colonies the
high costs of immigration and the lack of sufficient legal and judicial protection of the individual against the arbitrariness of government officers
and the planter aristocracy prevented the emergence of a sufficient supply
of free labor and the development of a class of indepcndent farmers. In
Eastern Europe the caste system made i t impossible for outsiders to enter
the field of agricultural production. Big-scale farming was reserved to
menlbers of the nobility. Small holdings were reserved t o unfree bondmen.
Yet the fact that the enterprises einpioying unfree iabor wouid not be
able to stand the competition of enterprises employing free labor was not
contested by anybody. On this point the eighteenth- and early nineteenthcentury authors on agricultural management were no less unaninlous than
the writers of ancient Rome on farm problems. But the abolition of slavery
and serfdom could not be affected by the free play of the market system, as
political institutions had withdrawn the estates of the nobility and the
plantations from the supremacy of the market. Slavery and serfdom were
20. Cf. Ciccoti, Le Dkclin de I'esclavage antique (Paris, I ~ I O ) , pp. 292 ff.;
Salvioli, L e Capitalime dam le nzonde antique (Paris, 1906), pp. 141 ff.; Cairncs,
T h e Slave Power (London, 1862), p. 234.

628

Human Action

abolished by political action dictated by the spirit of the much-abused
laissez faire, laissez passer ideology.
Today mankind is again faced with endeavors to substitute compulsory
labor for the labor of the freeman selling his capacity t o work as a "commodity'' on the market. Of course, people believe that there is an essential
difference between the tasks incumbent upon the comrades of the socialist
conlnlonwealth and those incumbent upon slaves or serfs. The slaves and
serfs, they say, toiled for the benefit of an exploiting lord. But in a socialist
system thc produce of labor goes to society of which the toiler himself is a
part; here the worker works for himself, as it were. What this reasoning
overlooks is that the identification of the individual comrades and the
totality of all comrades with the collective entity pocketing the produce of
all work is merely fictitious. Whether the ends which the community's
officeholders are aiming at agree or disagree with the wishes and desires
of the various comrades, is of minor importance. The main thing is that
the individual's contribution to the coIlective entity's wealth is not requited
in the shape of wages determined by the market. ,4 socialist commonwealth
lacks any method of economic calculation; it cannot determine separately
what quotas of the total amount of goods produced are to be assigned to
the various complementary factors of production. As it cannot ascertain
the magnitude of the contrib~tionsociety owes to the various individual's
efforts, it cannot remunerate the workers according to the value of their
performance.
In order to distinguish free labor from compulsory labor no metaphysical subtleties concerning the essence of freedom and compulsion are required. W e may call free labor that kind of extroversive, not immediately
gratifying labor that a man performs either for the direct satisfaction of his
own wants or for their indirect satisfaction to be reaped by expending the
price earned by its sale on the market. Compulsory labor is labor performed under the pressure of other incentives. If somebody were t o take
umbrage at this terminology because the employment of words like freedom and compulsion may arouse an association of ideas injurious to a dispassionate treatment of the problems involved, one could as well choose
other terms. W e may substitute the expression F labor for the term free
labor and the term C labor for the term compulsory labor. The crucial
problem cannot be affected by the choice of the terms. -w-hat aione matters
is this: What kind of inducement can spur a man to submit to the disutility
of labor if his own want-satisfaction neither directly nor-to any appreciable extent-indirectly depends on the quantity and quality of his performance?
Let us assume for the sake of argument that many workers, perhaps
even most of them, will of their own accord dutifully take pains for the
best possible fulfillment of the tasks assigned to them by their superiors.
( W e may disregard the fact that the determination of the task to be imposed upon the various individuals wouId confront a socialist commonwealth with insoluble problems.) But how to deal with those sluggish and

Work and W a g e s
careless in the discharge of the imposed duties? There is no other way left
than to punish them. In their superiors must be vested the authority to
establish the offense, to give judgment on its subjective reasons, and to
mete out punishment accordingly. A hegemonic bond is substituted for
the contractual bond. The worker becomes subject t o the discretionary
power of his superiors, he is personally subordinate to his chief's disciplinary power.
In the market economy the worker sells his services as other people sell
their commodities. The employer is not the employee's lord. He is simply
the buyer of services which he must purchase at their market price. Of
course, like every other buyer an employer too can take liberties. But if he
resorts to arbitrariness in hiring or discharging workers, he must foot the
bill. An employer or an employee entrusted with the management of a department of an enterprise is free t o discriminate in hiring workers, to fire
them arbitrarily, or to cut down their wages below the market rate. But in
indulging in such arbitrary acts he jeopardizes the profitability of his
enterprise or his department and thereby impairs his own income and his
position in the economic system. In the market economy such whims bring
their own punishment. The only real and effective protection of the wage
earner in the market economy is provided by the play of the factors determining the formation of prices. The market makes the worker independent
of arbitrary discretion on the part of the employer and his aides. The
workers are subject only to the supremacy of the consumers as their
employers are too. In determining, by buying or abstention from buying,
the prices of products and the employment of factors of production, consumers assign to each kind of labor its market price.
What makes the worker a free man is precisely the fact that the employer, under the pressure of the market's price structure, considers labor a
commodity, an instrument of earning profits. The employee is in the eyes
of the employer merely a man who for a consideration in money helps him
t o make money. The employer pays for services rendered and the etnployee performs in order to earn wages. There is in this relation between
employer and employee no question of favor or disfavor. The hired man
does not owe the employer gratitude; he owes him a definite quantity of
work of a definite kind and quality.
That is why in the market economy the employer can do without the
power to punish the employee. All nonmarket systems of production must
give to those in control the power to spur on the slow worker to more zeal
and application. As imprisonment withdraws the worker from his job or
at least reduces considerabIy the value of his contribution, corporal punishment has always been the classical means of keeping slaves and serfs to their
work. With the abolition of unfree labor one could dispense with the whip
as a stimulu6. Flogging was the symbol of bond labor. Members of a
market society consider corporal punishment inhuman and humiliating to
such a degree that it has been abolished also in the schools, in the penal
code, and in military discipline.

630

Human Action

He who believes that a socialist commonwealth could do without compulsion and coercion against slothful workers because everyone will spontaneously do his duty, falls prey to the same illusions implied in the doctrine
of anarchy.

XXII. T H E NONHUMAN ORIGINAL FACTORS
OF PRODUCTION
General Observations Concerning the Theory of Rent
N the frame of Ricardian economics the idea of rent was an attempt
at a treatment of those problems which modern economics approaches by means of marginal-utility ana1ysis.l Ricardo's theory appears rather unsatisfactory when judged from the point of view of
present-day insight; there is no doubt that the method of the
subjective-value theory is far superior. Yet the renown of the rent
theory is well deserved; the care bestowed upon its initiation and
perfection brought forth fine fruits. There is no reason for the history
of economic thought to feel ashamed of the rent t h e ~ r y . ~
The fact that land of different quality and fertility, i.e., yielding
different returns per unit of input, is valued differently does not pose
any special problem to modern economics. As far as Ricardo's theory
refers to the graduation in the valuation and appraisement of pieces
of land, it is completely comprehended in the modern theory of the
prices of factors of production. It is not the content of the rent theory
that is objectionable, but the exceptional position assigned to it in
the complex of the economic system. Differential rent is a general
phenomenon and is not limited to the determination of the prices of
Iand. The sophisticated distinction between "rents" and "quasi-rents"
is spurious. Land and the services it renders are dealt with in the same
way as other factors of production and their services. Control of a
better tool yields "rentJ' when compared with the returns of less
suitable tools which must be utilized on account of the insufficient
supply of more suitable ones. The abler and more zealous worker
earns a "rent" when compared with the wages earned by his less skillful and less industrious competitors.
The problems which the rent concept was designed to solve were
for the most part generated by the employment of inappropriate
I.

I

I . It was, says Fetter (Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, XIII, zgr), "a
garbled margidity theory."
2. Cf. Amonn, Ricardo als Begriinder der theoretischen Nationdokonomie

(Jena, 19241, pp. 54 ff.

632
Human Action
terms. The general notions as used in everyday language and mundane
thought were not formed with regard to the requirements of praxeological and economic investigation. The early economists were mistaken in adopting them without scruple and hesitation. Only if one
clings na'ively to general terms such as land or labor, is one puzzled
by the question why land and labor are differently valued and appaised. He who does not allow himself to be fooled by mere words,
but looks at a factor's relevance for the satisfaction of human wants,
considers it a matter of course that different services are valued and
appraised differently.
T h e modern theory of value and prices is not based on the classification of the factors of production as land, capital, and labor. Its
fundamental distinction is between goods of higher and of lower
orders, between producers' goods and consumers' goods. When it
distinguishes within the class of factors of production the original
(nature-given) factors from the produced factors of production (the
intermediary products) and furthermore within the class of original
factors the nonhuman (external) factors from the human factors
(labor), it does not break up the uniformity of its reasoning concerning the determination of the prices of the factors of production. The
law controlling the determination of the prices of the factors of production is the same with all classes and specimens of these factors. The
fact that different services rendered by such factors are valued, appraised, and dealt with in a different way can only amaze people who
fail to notice these differences in serviceableness. H e who is blind to
the merits of a painting may consider it strange that collectors should
pay more for a painting of Velasquez than for a painting of a less
gifted artist; for the connoisseur it is self-evident. I t does not astonish
the farmer that buyers pay higher prices and tenants higher leases for
more fertile land than for less fertile. T h e only reason why the old
economists were puzzled by this fact was that they operated with a
aeneral term land that negIects differences in productivity.
D
T h e greatest merit of the Ricardian theory of rent is the cognizance
of the fact that the marginal land does not yield any rent. From this
knowledge there is but one step to the discovery of the principle of
valuational subjectivism. Yet blinded by the real cost notion neither
the classical economists nor their epigones took this step.
While the differential-rent idea, by and large, can be adopted by
the subjective-value theory, the second rent concept derived from
Ricardian economics, viz., the residual-rent concept, must be rejected
altogether. This residual-claimant idea is based on the notion of real
or physical costs that does not make any sense in the frame of the

Nonhuman Original Factors of Production

63 3
modern explanation of the prices of factors of production. T h e reason
why the price of Burgundy is higher than that of Chianti is not the
higher price of the vineyards of Burgundy as against those of Tuscany.
T h e causation is the other way around. Because people are ready to
pay higher prices for Burgundy than for Chianti, winegrowers are
ready to pay higher prices for the vineyards of Burgundy than for
those of Tuscany.
Profits are not a share left over when all costs of production have
been paid. In the evenly rotating economy such a surplus of the prices
of products over and above costs could never appear. In the changing
economy differences between the prices of the products and the sum
of the prices that the entrepreneur has expended for the purchase of
the complementary factors of production plus interest on the capital
invested can appear in either direction, i.e., either as profit or as loss.
These differences are caused by changes which arise in the prices of
the products in the time interval. H e who succeeds better than others
in anticipating these changes in time and acts accordingly, reaps
profits. H e who fails in his endeavors t o adjust his entrepreneurial
ventures to the future state of the market is penalized b y losses.
T h e main deficiency of Ricardian economics was that it was a
theory of the distribution of a total product of a nation's joint efforts.
Like the other champions of classical economics Ricardo failed to
frce himself from the Mercantilist image of the Volkswirtschaft. In
his thought the problem of the determination of prices was subordinated to the problem of the distribution of wealth. T h e customary
characterization of his economic philosophy as "that of the manufacturing middle classes of contemporary England" " misses the point.
These English businessmen of the early nineteenth century were not
interested in the total product of industry and its distribution. They
were guided by the urgc to make profits and to avoid losscs.
Classical economics erred whcn it assigned to Iand a distinct place
in its theoretical scheme. Land is, in the economic sense, a factor of
production, and the Iaws determining the formation of the prices of
Iand are the same that determine the formation of the prices of other
factors of production. All peculiarities of the economic teachings concerning land refer to some peculiarities of the data involved.
3. Cf., for example, Haney, History of Economic Thought (rev. ed. New
York, 1927), p. 2 7 5 .

Human Action
1. T h e Time Factor

in Land Utilization

T h e starting point of the economic teachings concerning land is
the distinction between two classes of original factors of production,
viz., human and nonhuman factors. As the utilization of the nonhuman factors is as rule connected with the power to utilize a piece
of the earth, we speak of land when referring to them.4
In dealing with the economic problems of land, i.e., the nonhuman
original factors of production, one must neatly separate the praxeological point of view from the cosmological point of view. It may
make good sense for cosmology in its study of cosmic events to speak
of permanency and of the conservation of mass and energy. If one
compares the orbit within which human action is able to affect the
naturaI environmental conditions of human life with the operation
of natural entities, it is permissible to call the natural powers indestructible and permanent or-more precisely-safe against destruction by human action. For the great periods of time to which cosinology refers, soil erosion (in the broadest sense of the term) of such
an intensity as can be effected by human interference is of no importance. Nobody knows today whether or not cosmic changes will
in millions of years transform deserts and barren soil into land that
from {he point of view of our present-day knowledge will have to
be described as extremely fertile and the most luxuriant tropical
gardens into sterile land. Precisely because nobody can anticipate
such changes nor venture to influence the cosmic events which possibly could bring them about, it is supererogatory to spec~ilateabout
them in dealing with the problems of human action."
T h e natural sciences may assert that those powers of thc soil that
condition its serviceableness for forestry, cattle breeding, agriculture,
and water utilization regenerate themselves periodically. It may be
true that even human endeavors deliberately directed toward the utmost devastation of the productive capacity of the earth's crust could
at best succeed only with regard to small parts of it. But these facts do
not strictly count for human action. The periodical regeneration
of the soil's productive powers is not a rigid datum that would face
man with a uniquely determined situation. It is possible to use the soil
in such a way that this regeneration is slowed down and postponed or
4. Legal provisions concerning the separation of the right of hunting, fishing,
and extracting mineral deposits from the other rights of the owner of a piece of
land are of no interest for catallactics. T h e term land as used in catallactics includes also expanses of water.
5. Thus also the problem of entropy stands outside of the sphere of praxeological meditation.

Nonhuman Orighal Factors of Production
the soil's productive power either vanishes altogether for a definite
period of time or can only be restored by means of a considerable
input of capital and labor. In dealing with the soil man has to choose
between various methods different from one another with regard to
the preservation and regeneration of its productive power. No less
than in any other branch of production, the time factor enters also
into the conduct of hunting, fishing, grazing, cattle breeding, plant
growing, lumbering and water utilization. Here too man must choose
between satisfaction in nearer and in more remote periods of the
future. Here too the phenomenon of originary interest, entailed in
every human action, plays its paramount role.
There are institutional conditions that cause the persons involved to
prefer satisfaction in the nearer future and to disregard entirely or almost entirely satisfaction in the more distant future. If the soil is on
the one hand not owned by individual proprietors and on the other
hand all, or certain people favored by special privilege or by the actual
state of affairs, are free to make use of it temporarily for their own
benefit, no heed is paid to the future. The same is the case when the
proprietor expects that he will be expropriated in a not too distant
future. In both cases the actors are exclusively intent upon squeezing
out as much as possible for their immediate advantage. They do not
concern themselves about the temporally more remote consequences
of their net hods of exploitation. Tomorrow does not count for them.
T h e history of lumbering, hunting, and fishing provides plenty of illustrative experience; but many examples can also be found in other
branches of soil utilization.
From the point of view of the natural sciences, the maintenance of
capital goods and the preservation of the powers of the soil belong to
two entirely different categories. The produced factors of production
perish sooner or later entirely in the pursuit of production processes,
and piecemeal are transformed into consumers' goods which are
eventually consumed. If one does not want to make the results of
past saving and capital accumulation disappear, one must, apart from
consumers' goods, also produce that amount of capital goods which is
needed for the replacement of those worn out. If one were to neglect
this, one would finally consume, as it were, the capital goods. One
would sacrifice the future to the present; one would live in luxury
today and be in want later.
But, it is often said, it is different with the powers of land. They
cannot: be consumed. Such a statement is meaningful, however, only
from the point of view of geology. But from the geological point of
view one could, or should, no less deny that factory equipment or a

636

Human Action

railroad can be "eaten up." The gravel and stones of a railroad's substructure and the iron and steel of the rails, bridges, cars, and engines
do not perish in a cosmic sense. Only from the praxeological point of
view is it permissible to speak of the consumption, the eating up,
of a tool a railroad, or a steel mill. In the same economic sense we
speak of the consumption of the productive powers of the soil. In
forestry, agriculture, and water utilization these powers are dealt with
in the same way as other factors of production. With regard to the
powers of the soil, too, the actors must choose between processes of
production which render higher output at the expense of productivity
in later periods and processes which do not impair future physical
productivity. It is possible to extract so much from the soil that its
later utilization will render smaller returns (per unit of the quantities
of capital and labor employed) or practically no returns at all.
It is true that there are physical limits to the devastating powers of
man. (These limits are sooner reached in lumbering, hunting, and
fishing than in tilling the soil.) But this fact results only in a quantitative, not in a qualitative difference between capital decumulation and
soil erosion.
Ricardo calls the powers of the soil "original and indestructible."
However, modern economics must stress the point that valuation and
appraisement do not differentiate between original and produced
factors of production, and that the cosmological indestructibility of
mass and energy, whatever it may mean, does not enjoin upon land
utilization a character radically different from other branches of
production.

3. The Submarginal Land
The services a definite piece of land can render in a definite period
of time are limited. If they were unlimited, men would not consider
land a factor of production and an economic good. However, the
quantity of soii available is so vast, nature is so prodigai, that iand is
still abundant. Therefore, only the most productive pieces of land
are utilized. There is land which people consider-either with regard
to its physical productivity or with regard to its location-as too poor
to be worth cultivating. Consequently the marginal soil, i.e., the
poorest soil cultivated, yields no rent in the Ricardian sense.7 Submarginal land would be considered entirely worthless if one were

taxation^

6. Ricardo, Principles o f Political Economy and
p. 34.
7. There are areas in which practically every corner is cultivated or otherwise

utilized. But this is the outcome of institutional conditions barring the inhabitants
of these regions from access to more fertile unused soil.

Nonhunza7z Original Factors of Production

637

not to appraise it positively in anticipation of its being utilized in
later days.%
T h e fact that the market economy does not have a more ample
supply of agricultural products is caused by the scarcity of capital
and labor, not by a scarcity of cultivable land. An increase in the
surface of land available would-other things being equal-increase
the supply of cereals and meat only if the additional land's fertility
exceeded that of the marginal land already previously cultivated. On
the other hand, the supply of agricultural products would be increased
by any increase in the amount of labor and capital available, ~ r o v i d e d
the consumers do not consider another employment of the additional
amounr of capital and labor more appropriate to fill their most urgent
ants.^

T h e usefuI mineral substances contained in the soil are Iimited in
quantity. It is true that some of them are the outgrowth of natural
processes which are still going on and increasing the existing deposits.
However, the slowness and length of these processes makes them insignificant for human action. Man must take into account that the
available deposits of these minerals are limited, Every single mine or
oiI source is eshaustible; many of them are already exhausted. W e
may hope that new deposits will be discovered and that technological
procedures will be invented which will make it possible to utilize deposits which today cannot be exploited at all or only at unreasonable
costs. W e may also assume that the further progress of technological
knowledge will enable later generations to utilize substances which
cannot be utilized today. But all these things do not matter for the
present-day conduct of mining and oil drilling. T h e deposits of
mineral substances and their exploitation are not characterized by
features which would give a particular mark to human action dealing
with them. For catallactics the distinction between soil used in agriculture and that used in mining is merely a distinction of data.
Although the available quantities of these mineral substances are
limited, and although we may academically concern ourselves with
the possibility that they will-be entirely exhausted one day, acting
men do not consider these deposits rigidly limited. Their activities
take into account the fact that definite mines and wells will become
exhausted, hut they do not pay heed to the fact that at an unknown
8. The appraisal of a piece of soiI must not be confused with the appraisal of
the improvements, i.e., the irremovable and inconvertible results of the investment of capital and labor that facilitate its utilization and raise future outputs per
unit of current future inputs.
9. These observations, of course, refer only t o conditions in which there are n o
institutional barriers to the mobility of capital and labor.

638
Human Action
later date all the deposits of certain minerals may come to an end.
For to present-day action the supply of these substances appears to
be so abundant that one does not venture to exploit all their deposits
to the full extent which the state of technological knowledge permits. The mines are utilized only as far as there is no more urgent
employment available for the required quantities of capital and labor.
There are therefore submarginal deposits that are not utilized at all.
In every mine operated the extent of the production is determined
by the relation between the prices of the products and those of the
required nonspecific factors of production.

4. The Land as Standing Room
The employment of land for the location of human residences,
workshops, and means of transportation withdraws pieces of soil
from other employments.
The particular place which older theories attributed to urban site
rent need not here concern us. It is not especially noteworthy that
people pay higher prices for land they value more for housing than
for land which they value less. It is a matter of fact that for workshops,
warehouses, and railroad yards people prefer locations which reduce
costs of transportation, and that they are ready to pay higher prices
for such land in accordance with the economies expected.
Land is also used for pkasure grounds and gardens, for parks and
for the enjoyment of the grandeur and beauty of nature. With the
development of the love of nature, this very characteristic feature
of "bourgeois" mentality, the demand for such enjoyments increased
enormously. The soil of the high mountain chains. once merely considered a barren dreariness of rocks and glaciers, is today highly
appreciated as the source of the most lofty pleasures.
From time immemorial access to these spaces has been free to
everybody. Even if the land is owned by private individuals, the
owners as a ruie have not the right to ciose it to tourists and mountainclimbers or to ask an entrance fee. Whoever has the opportunity to
visit these areas, has the right to enjoy a11 their grandeur, and to consider them his own, as it were. The nominal owner does not derive
any advantage from the satisfaction his property gives to the visitors.
But this does not alter the fact that this land serves human well-being
arid is appreciated accordingly. The ground is subject to an easement
that entitles everybody to pass along and to camp on it. As no other
utilization of the area concerned is possible, this servitude completely
exhausts all the advantages the proprietor could reap from his owner-

Nonhuman Original Factors of Production

639

ship. Since the particular services which these rocks and glaciers can
render are practically inexhaustible, do not wear out, and do not require any input of capital and labor for their conservation, this arrangement does not bring about those consequences which appeared
wherever it was applied to lumbering, hunting, and fishing grounds.
If, in the neighborhood of these mountain chains, the space available
for the construction of sl~elters,hotels, and means of transportation
(e.g., rack railroads) is limited, the owners of these scarce pieces of
soil can sell or rent them on more propitious terms and thus divert to
themselves a part of the advantages the tourists reap from the free
accessibility of the peaks. If this is not the case, the tourists enjoy all
these advantages gratuitously.

5. The Prices of Land
In the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy
buying and selling of the services of definite pieces of land does not
differ at all from buying and selling the services of other factors of
production. All these factors are appraised according to the services
they will render in various periods of the future, due aIlowance being
made for time preference. For the marginal land (and, of course,
for the submarginal land) no price is paid at all. Rent-bearing land
(i.e., land that, compared with the marginal land, bears a higher output
per unit of input of capital and labor) is appraised in accordance with
the degree of its superiority. Its price is the sum of all its future rents,
each of them discounted at the rate of originary interest.1°
In the changing economy people buying and selling land take due
account of expected changes in the market prices for the services
rendered by the soil. Of course, they may err in their expectations;
but this is another thing. 'They try to anticipate to the best of their
abilities future events that may alter the market data and they act
in accordance with these opinions. If they believe that the annual net
yield of the piece of land concerned will rise, the price will be higher
than it would have been in the absence of such expectations. This is,
10. There is nced to remember again that the imaginary construction of the
evenly rotating economy cannot be carried consistently to its ultimate logical
consequences (sec above, p. 249). With regard to thc problems of land one must
stress two points: First, that in the framc of this imaginary construction, characterized by the absence of changes in the conduct of affairs, there is no room
for the buying and selling of land. Second, that in order to integrate into this
construction mining and oil drilling we must ascribe to the mines and oil wells a
permanent character and must disregard the possibiIity that any of the operated
mines and wells could be exhausted o r evcn undergo 3 change in the quanfity of
output or of current input required.

640

Human Action

for instance, the case with suburban land in the neighborhood of cities
growing in population or with forests and arable land in countries in
which pressure groups are likely to succeed in raising, by means of
tariffs, the prices of timber and cereals. O n the other hand, fears concerning the total or partial confiscation of the net yield of land tend
to lower the prices of land. In everyday business language people
speak of the "capitalization" of the rent and observe that the rate of
capitalization is different with different classes of land and varies even
within the same class with different pieces of soil. This terminology
is rather inexpedient as it n~isrepresentsthe nature of the process.
I n the same way in which buyers and sellers of land take into
account anticipated future event; that wiII reduce the net return,
they deal with taxes. Taxes levied upon land reduce its market price
to the extent of the discounted amount of their future burden. T h e
introduction of a new tax of this kind which is likely not to be abolished results in an immediate drop in the market price of the pieces of
land concerned. This is the phenomenon that the theory of taxation
calls amortization of taxes.
In many countries the owners of land or of certain estates enjoyed
special political legal privileges or a great social prestige. Such institutions too can play a role in the determination of the prices of land.

The Myth of the Soil
Romanticists condemn the economic theories concerning land for their
utilitarian narrow-mindedness. Economists, they say, look upon land from
the point of view of the callous speculator who degrades all eternal values
to terms of money and profit. Yet, the glebe is ~nuchmore than a mere
factor of production. It is the inexhaustible source of human energy and
human life. Agriculture is not simply one branch of production anlong
many other branches. It is the only natural and respectable activity of man,
the only dignified condition of a really human existence. It is iniquitous to
judge it merely with regard to the net returns to be squeezed out of the
soil. The soil not only bears the fruits that nourish our body; it produces
first of all the moral and spiritual forces of civilization. The cities, the
processing industries, and commerce are phenomena of depravity and decay; their existence is parasitic; they destroy what the ploughman must
create again and again.
Thousands of years ago, when fishing and hunting tribesmen began to
cultivate the soil, romantic reverie was unknown. But if there had lived
romanticists in those ages, they would have eulogized the lofty moral
values of the hunt and would have stigmatized soil cultivation as a phenomenon of depravity. They would have reproached the ploughman for

Nonhuman Original Factors of Production
desecrating the soil that the gods had given to man as a hunting ground
and for degrading it to a means of production.
In the preromantic ages in his actions tio one considered the soil as anything other than a source of human well-being, a tneans to promote welfare.
T h e magic rites and observances concerning the soil aimed at nothing else
than improvement of the soil's fertility and increase in the quantity of
fruits to be harvested. These people did not seek the unio mystica with
the tnysterious powers and forces hidden in the soil. A11 they aimed at was
bigger and better crops. They resorted to magic rituals and adjurations
because in their opinion this was the most efficient method of attaining
the ends sought. Their sophisticated progeny erred when they interpreted
these ceremonies from an "idealistic" point of view. A real peasant does
not indulge in ecstatic babble about the soil and its mysterious powers.
For him land is a factor of production, not an object of sentimental emotions. H e covets more land because he desires to increase his income and to
improve his standard of living. Farmers buy and sell land and mortgage it;
they sell the produce of land and become very indignant if the prices are
not as high as they want them to be.
Love of nature and appreciation of the beauties of the landscape were
foreign to the rural population. T h e inhabitants of the cities brought them
to the countryside. It was the city-dwellers who began to appreciate the
land as nature, while the countrymen valued it only from the point of view
of its productivity for hunting, lumbering, crop raising and cattle breeding.
From time immemorial the rocks and glaciers of the Alps were merely
waste land in the eyes of the mountaineers. Only when the townsfolk ventured to climb the peaks, and brought money into the valleys, did they
change their minds. The pioneers of mountain climbing and skiing were
ridiculed b y the indigenous population until they found out that they could
derive gain from this eccentricity.
Kot shepherds, but sophisticated aristocrats and city-dwellers were the
authors of bucolic poetry. Daphnis and Chloe are creations of fancies far
removed from earthy concerns. No less removed from the soil is the
modern political myth of the soil. It did not blossom from the moss of the
forests and the loam of the fields, but from the pavements of the cities and
the carpets of the salons. The farmers make use of it because they find it a
.."Ac+:oAl

kII = L L I L ( I I

.-aA*c

msmb(1115

$.,

"I

---5

-UL.+.-:U C L l l l l l l l fj p...nl:I+:,.-Il L J L d l Y....:..:II I V I I L

their products and of their farms.

GJ

..":",.

.-.L
:-L
+L.. -La.." *.L
W111L11 1613G L11C ~ I I l L G DUl

XXIII. THE DATA OF THE MARKET
I.

T h e Theory and the Data

ATALLACTICS,
the theory of the market economy, is not a system
of theorems vaIid only under ideal and unrealizable conditions
C
and applicable to reality merely with essential restrictions and modifications. All the theorems of catallactics are rigidly and without
any exception valid for all phenomena of the market economy, provided the particular conditions which they presuppose are present.
It is, for instance, a sinlple question of fact whether there is direct or
indirect cxchange. But where there is indirect exchange, all the gcneral
laws of the theory of indirect exchange arc valid with regard to the
acts of exchange and the media of exchange. As has been pointed out,"
praxeological knowledge is precise or exact knowledge of reality. All
references to the epistemological issues of the natural sciences and all
analogies derived from cornparing these two radically different realms
of reality and cognition are misleading. There is, apart from formal
logic, no such thing as a set of "methodological" rules applicable both
to cognition by means of the category of causality and to that by
means of the category of finality.
Praxcology deals with human action as such in a general and univcrsal way. It deals neither with the particular conditions of the environment in which man acts nor with the concrete content of the valuations which direct his actions. For praxeology data are the bodily and
psychological features of the acting men, their desires and value judgments, and the theories, doctrines, and ideologies they develop in order
to adjust themselves purposively to the conditions of their environment and thus to attain the cnds they are aiming at. These data, although permanent in their structure and strictly determined by the
laws controlling the order of the universe, are perpetually fluctuating
and varying; they change from instant to instant."
The fullness of reality can be mentally mastered only by a mind
resorting both to the conception of praxeology and to the underr . See above, p. 39.

Cf. Strigl, Die cj'konomischen Kategorien und die Organisation der 1Yirtschaft (Jena,rgzj), pp. 18 ff.
2.

T h e Dnta of the Market

643
standing of history; and the latter requires command of the teachings
of the natural sciences. Cognition and prediction are provided by
the totality of knowledge. What the various single branches of science
offer is always fragmentary; it must be complemented by the results
of all the other branches. From the point of view of acting man the
specialization of knowledge and its breaking up into the various sciences is merely a device of the division of labor. In the same way in
which the consumer utilizes the products of various branches of
production, the actor must base his decisions on knowledge brought
about by various branches of thought and investigation.
It is not permissible to disregard any of these branches in dealing
with reality. The Historical School and the Institutionalists want to
outlaw the study of praxeology and economics and to occupy themselves merely with the registration of the data or, as they call them
nowadays, the institutions. But no statement concerning these data
can be made without reference to a definite set of economic theorems.
When an institutionalist ascribes a definite event to a definite cause,
e.g., mass unemployment to the alleged deficiencies of the capitalist
mode of production, he resorts to an economic theorem. In objecting
to the closer examination of the theorem tacitly implied in his conclusions, he merely wants to avoid the exposure of the fallacies of his
argument. There is no such thing as a mere recording of unadulterated
facts apart from any reference to theories. As soon as tw-o events are
recorded together or integrated into a class of events, a theory is
operative. The question whether there is any connection between them
can only be answered by a theory, i.e., in the case of human action
by praxeology. It is vain to search for coefficients of correlation if one
does not start from a theoretical insight acquired beforehand. The coefficient may have a high numerical value without indicating any significant and relevant connection between the two g r o ~ p s . ~
2. T h e

Role of Power

The Historical School and Institutionalism condemn economics
for disregarding the role which power plays in real life. The basic
notion of economics, viz., the choosing and acting individual, is,
they say, an unrealistic concept. Real man is not free to choose and
to act. He is subject to social pressure, to the sway of irresistible power.
It is not the individuals' value judgments, but the interactions of the
forces of power that determine the market phenomena.
3. Cf. Cohen and Nagel, A n Introduction to Logic and Scientific Method
(New York, 1 9 3 9 ) ~pp. 316322.

644

Human Action

These objections are no less spurious than all other statements of
the critics of economics.
Praxeology in general and economics and catallactics in particular
do not contend or assume that man is free in any metaphysical sense
attached to the term freedom. Man is unconditionally subject to the
natural conditions of his environment. In acting he must adjust hirnself to the inexorable regularity of natural phenomena. It is precisely
the scarcity of the nature-given conditions of his welfare that cnjoins
upon man the necessity to act.'
In acting man is directed by ideologies. H e chooses ends and means
under the influence of ideologies. The might of an ideology is either
direct or indirect. It is direct when the actor is convinced that the
content of the ideology is correct and that he serves his own interests
directly in complying with it. It is indirect when the actor rejects the
content of thc ideology as false, but is under the necessity of adjusting
his actions to the fact that this ideology is endorsed by other people.
The mores of their social environment are a power xvhich people
are forced to consider. Those recognizing the spuriousness of the
generally accepted opinions and habits must in each instance choose
between the advantages to be derived from resorting to a more efficient mode of acting and the disadvantages resulting from the contempt of popular prejudices, superstitions, and folkways.
T h e same is true with regard to violence. In choosing man must
take into account the fact that there is a factor ready to exercise violent
compulsion upon him.
All the theorems of catallactics are valid also with regard to actions
influenced by such social or physical pressure. The direct or indirect
might of an ideology and the threat of physical compulsion are merely
data of the market situation. It does not matter, for instance, what
kind of considerations motivate a man not to offer a higher bid for
the purchase of a commodity than the one he really makes without
obtaining the good concerned. For the determination of the marlrct
price it is immaterial whether he spontaneously prefers to spend his
money for other purposes or whether he is afraid of being looked
upon by his fellow men as an upstart, or as a spendthrift, afraid of
4. Most social reformers, foremost among them Fourier and Marx, pass over in
silence the fact that the nature-given means of removing human uneasiness are
scarce. As they see it, the fact that there is not an abundance of all useful things
is merely caused by the inadequacy of the capitalist node of production and will
therefore disappear in the "higher phase" of communism. A n eminent Menshevik
author who could not help referring to the nature-given barriers to human wellbeing, in genuineIy Marxian style, calls Nature "the most relentless exploiter."
Cf. Mania Gordon, Workers Before and After Lenin (New York, 1941), pp. 227,
458.

The Data of the Market
violating a government-decreed ceiling price or of defying a competitor ready to resort to violent revenge. In any case his abstention from
bidding a higher price contributes to the same extent to the emergence
of the market price."
I t is customary nowadays to signify the position which the owners
of property occupy on the ~narketas economic power. T h e expediency of this terminology is questionable. T h e term is at any rate
inappropriate as far as it is intended to imply that under the impact
of econon~icpower the determination of the market phenomena is
controlled by laws other than those dealt with b y catallactics.

3. The Historical Role of War and Conquest
Many authors glorify war and revolution, bloodshed and conquest.
Carlyle and Ruskin, Nietzsche, Georges Sorel, and Spengler were
harbingers of the ideas which Lenin and Stalin, Hitler and hlussolini
put into effect.
The course of history, say these phiIosophies, is not determined
b y the mean activities of materialistic peddlers and merchants, but
by the heroic deeds of warriors and conquerors. T h e economists
err in abstracting from the experience of the short-lived liberal
episode a theory to which they ascribe universal validity. This epoch
of liberalism, individualism, and capitalism; of democracy, toIerance,
and freedom; of the disregard of all "true" and "eternal" values; and
of the supremacy of the rabble is now vanishing and will never return.
T h e dawning age of manliness requires a new theory of human action.
However, no economist ever ventured to deny that war and conquest were of utmost importance in the past and that Huns and Tartars, Vandals and Vikings, Normans and conquistadors played an
enormous part in history. One of the determinants of the present state
of mankind is the fact that there were thousands of years of armed
conflicts. Yet, what remains and is the essence of human civilization,
is not the legacy inherited from the warriors. Civilization is an achievement of the "bourgeois" spirit, not of the spirit of conquest. Those
barbarian peoples who did not substitute working for plundering
disappeared from the historical scene. If there is still any trace left
of their existence, it is in the achievements they accomplished under
the influence of the civilization of the subdued peoples. Latin civilization survived in Italy, France, and the Iberian peninsula in defiance
of all barbarian invasions. If capitalist entrepreneurs had not succeeded
5. The economic consequences of the interference of external compulsion and
coercion with the market phenomena are dealt with in the sixth part of this book.

646

Human Action

Lord Clive and Warren Hastings, British rule in India might one day
becol-ne such an insignificant historical reminiscence as are the one
hundred and fifty years of Turkish rule in Hungary.
It is not the task of economics to enter into an examination of the
endeavors to revive the ideals of the Vikings. It has merely to refute
the statements that the fact that there are armed conflicts reduces its
teachings to nought. W7ith regard to this problem there is need to
emphasize again the following:
I;irst: The teachings of catallactics do not refer to a definite epoch
of history, but to a11 actions characterized b y the two conditions
private ou;nershi+ of the nzeans of production and division of labor.
Whenever and wherever, in a society in which there is private ownership of the means of production, peopIe not only produce for the
direct satisfaction of their own wants but also consume goods produced by other people, the theorems of catallactics are strictly valid.
Second: If apart from the market and outside of the market there
is robbing and plundering, these facts are a datum for the market. The
actors must take into account the fact that they are threatened by
murderers and robbers. If killing and robbing become so prcvalent
that any production appears useless, it may finally happen that productive work ceases and mankind plunges into a state of war of
every man against every other man.
Third: In order to seize booty, something to be plundered must
be available. T h e heroes can only live if there are enough "bourgeois"
to be expropriated. T h e existence of producers is a condition for the
survival of conquerors. But the producers could do without the
plunderers.
Fourth: There are, of course, other imaginable systems of a society
based on the division of labor besides the capitalist system of private
ownership of the means of production. Champions of militarism are
consistent in asking for the establishment of socialism. 'The whole
nation should be organized as a community of warriors in which the
noncombatants have no other task than that of suppiying the fighting
forces with all they need. (The problems of socialism are dealt with
in the fifth part of this book.)

4. Real Man as a Datum
Economics deals with the real actions of real men. Its theorems
refer neither to ideal nor to perfect men, neither to the phantom of
a fabulous economic man (homo oeconomicus) nor to the statistical
notion of an average man (homme moyen). Man with all his weak-

The Data of the Market

647

msses and limitations, every man as he lives and acts, is the subject
matter of catallactics. Every human action is a theme of praxeology.
T h e subject matter of praxeology is not only the study of society,
societal relations, and mass phenomena, but the study of all human
actions. T h e term "the social sciences" and all its connotations are
in this regard misleading.
There is no yardstick that a scientific investigation can apply to
human action other than that of the ultimate goals the acting individual wants to realize in embarking upon a definite action. T h e ultimate
goals themselves are beyond and abovc any criticism. Nobody is
called upon to establish what could make another man happy. What
an unaffected observer can question is merely whether or not the
means chosen for the attainment of these ultimate goals are fit t o
bring about the results sought by the actor. Only in answering this
question is economics free to express an opinion about the actions
of individuals and groups of individuals, or of the policies of parties,
pressure groups, and governments.
I t is customary to disguise the arbitrariness of the attacks launched
against the value judgments of other people by converting them into
a critique of the capitalist system or of the conduct of entrepreneurs.
Economics is neutral with regard to a11 such statements.
T o the arbitrary statement that "the balance between the production of different goods is admittedly faulty under capitalism," e the
economist does not oppose the statement that this balance is faultless.
What the economist asserts is that in the unhampered market economy
this balance is in agreement with the conduct of the consumers as
displayed in the spcnding of their inco~nes.~
I t is not the task of the
economist to censure his fellow men and to call the result of their
actions faulty.
T h e alternative to the system in wGch the individual's value judgments are paramount in the conduct of production processes is autocratic dictatorship. Then the value judgments of the dictators alone
decide although they are not less arbitrary than those of other people.
Man is certainly not a perfcct being. His human weakness taints
all human institutions and thus also the market economy.
L

6. Cf. Albert L. Meyers, Modern Economics (Ncw York, 1946), p. 672.
7. This is the general feature of democracy whether poIitical or economic.
Democratic elections do not provide the guarantee that the man clectcd is free
from faults, but merely that the majority of the voters prefer him to other candidates.

Human Action
5. T h e Period of Adjustment
Every change in the market data has its definite effects upon the
market. It takes a definite length of time before all these effects are
consummated, i.e., before the market is compIetely adjusted to the
new state of affairs.
Catallactics has to deal with all the various individuals' conscious
and purposive reactions to the changes in the data and not, of course,
merely with the final result brought about in the market structure by
the interplay of these actiotls. I t may happen that the effects of one
change in the data are counteracted by the effects of another change
occurring, by and large, at the same time and to the same extent. Then
no considerable change in the market prices finally results. The
statistician, exclusively preoccupied with the observation of mass
phenomena and the outgrowth of the totality of market transactions
as manifested in market prices, ignores the fact that the nonemergence
of changes in the height of prices is merely accidental and not the
outcome of a continuance in the data and the absence of specific adjustment activities. H e fails to see any movement and the social consequences of such movements. Yet each change in the data has it5 own
course, generates certain reactive responses on the part of the individuals affected and disturbs the relation between the various merni)ess
of the market system even if eventually no considerable changes in
the prices of the various goods and no changes at all in the figures
concerning the total amount of capital in the whole market system
res~lt.~
Economic history can give vague information ex post factum about
the length of adjustment periods. T h e method of attaining such information is, of course, not measurement, but historical understanding.
T h e various adjustment processes are in reality not isolated. Synchronously an indefinite number of them take their course, their paths
intersect, and they mutually influence one another. T o disentangle
this intricate tissue and to observe the chain of actions and reactions
set into motion by a definite change in the data is a difficult task for
. .meager and
the historian's understanding and the results are mostly
questionable.
T h e understanding of the length of adjustment periods is also the
most difficult task incumbent upon those eager to understand the
future, the entrepreneurs. Yet for success in entrepreneurial activities,
8. With regard to changes in the elements determining the purchasing power
of money see above, p. 414. With regard to the decumulation and accumulation
of capital see above, pp. 513-514.

T h e Data of the Market

649
mere anticipation of the direction in which the market will react to
a ccrtain event is of little significance if it is not supplemented bv an
adequate anticipation of the length of the various adjustment pe;iods
involved. Most of the mistakes committed by entrepreneurs in the
conduct of affairs and most of the blunders vitiating the prognoses
of future business trends on the part of "expert" forecasters arc caused
by errors concerning the length of adjustment periods.
In dealing with effects brought about by changes in the data, it
is customary to distinguish between the temporally nearer and the
temporally remoter effects, viz., the short-run effects and the longrun effects. This distinction is much older than the terminology in
which it is expressed nowadays.
In order to discover the immediate-the short-run-effects brought
about by a change in a datum, there is as a rule no need to resort to a
thorough investigation. The short-run effects are for the most part
obvious and seldom escape the notice of a na'ive observer unfamiliar
with searching investigations. What started economic studies was
precisely the fact that some men of genius began to suspect that the
remoter consequences of an event may differ from the immediate
effects visibIe even to the most simple-minded layman. The main
achievement of economics was thc disclosure of such long-run effects
hitherto unnoticed by the unaffected observer and neglected by the
statesman.
From their startling discoveries the classical economiscs derived a
rule for political practice. Governments, statesmen, and political
parties, they argued, in planning and acting should consider not
only the short-run consequences but also the Iong-run consequences
of their measures. The correctness of this inference is incontestable
and indisputable. Action aims at the substitution of a more satisfacrory
state of affairs for a less satisfactory. Whether or not the outcome
of a definite action will be considered more or less satisfactory depends on a correct anticipation of a11 its consequences, both short
run and long run.
Some people criticize economics for alleged neglect of the shortrun effects and for alleged preference given to the study of the Iongrun effects. The reproach is nonsensical. Economics has no means of
scrutinizing the results of a change in the data other than to start
with its immediate consequences and to analyze, step by step, proceeding from the first reaction to the remoter reactions, all the subsequent consequences, until it finally arrives at its ultimate consequences. The long-run analysis necessarily always fully includes
the short-run analysis.

650
Human Action
It is easy to understand why certain individuals, parties, and pressure
groups are eager to propagate the exclusive sway of the short-run
principle. Politics, they say, should never be concerned about the
long-run effects of a device and should never abstain from resorting to
a measure from which benefits are expected in the short run merely
because its long-run effects are detrimental. What counts is only the
short-run effects; "in the long run we shall all be dead." All that
economics has to answer to these passionate critics is that every decision should be based on a careful weighing of all its consequences,
both those in the short run and those in the long run. There are
certainly, both in the actions of individuals and in the conduct of
public affairs, situations in which the actors may have good reasons
to put up even with very undesirable long-run effects in order to
avoid what they consider still more undesirable short-run conditions.
It may sometimes be expedient for a man to heat the stove with his
furniture. But if he does, he should know what the remoter effects will
be. H e should not delude himself by believing that he has discovered
a wonderful new method of heating his premises.
That is all that economics need oppose to the frenzy of the shortrun apostIes. History, one day, will have to say much more. It will
have to establish the role that the recommendation of the short-run
principle-this revival of Madame de Pompadour's notorious phrase
apr2s nous le de'luge-played in the most serious crisis of Western
civilization. It will have to show how weIcome this slogan was to
governments and parties whose policies aimed at the consumption of
the spiritual and material capital inherited from earlier generations.

6. T h e Limits of Property Rights and the Problems
of External Costs and External Economies
Property rights as they arc circumscribed by laws and protected
by courts and the police, are the outgrowth of an age-long evolution.
The history of these ages is the record of struggles aiming at the
abolition of private properw. Again and again despots and popular
movements have tried to restrict the rights of private property or to
abolish it altogether. These endeavors, it is true, failed. But they have
left traces in the ideas determining the legal form and definition of
property. The legal concepts of property do not fully take account
of the social function of private property. There are certain inadequacies and incongruities which are reflected in the determination of
the market phenomena.
Carried through consistently, the right of property would entitle

The Data of the Market

651
the proprietor to claim all the advantages which the good's employment may generate on the one hand and would burden him with all
the disadvantages resulting from its employment on the other hand.
Then the proprietor alone would be fully responsible for the outcome. In dealing with his property he would take into account all
the expected results of his action, those considered favorable as well
as those considered unfavorable. But if some of the consequences of
his action are outside of the sphere of the benefits he is entitled to
reap and of the drawbacks that are put to his debit, he will not bother
in his planning about all the effects of his action. H e will disregard
those benefits which do not increase his own satisfaction and those
costs which do not burden him. His conduct will deviate from the line
which it would have followed if the laws were better adjusted to the
economic objectives of privatc ownership. He wilI embark upon
certain projects only because the laws release him from responsibility
for some of the costs incurred. He will abstain from other projects
merely because the laws prevent him from harvesting all the advantages derivable.
The laws concerning liability and indemnification for damages
caused were and still are in sorne respects deficient. By and large the
principle is accepted that everybody is liable to damages which his
actions have inflicted upon other people. But there were loopholes
left which the legislators were slow to fill. In sorne cases this tardiness
was intentional because the imperfections agreed with the plans of
the authorities. When in the past in many countries the owners of
factories and railroads were not held liagle for the damages which
the conduct of their enterprises inflicted on the property and health
of neighbors, patrons, employees, and other people through smoke,
soot, noise, water pollution, and accidents caused by defective or
inappropriate equipment, the idea was that one should not undermine
the progress of industrialization and the development of transportation facilities. The same doctrines which prompted and srilI are
prompting many governments to encourage investment in factories
and railroads through subsidies, tax exemption, tariffs, and cheap credit
were at work in the emergence of a legal state of affairs in which the
liability of such enterprises was either formally or practically abated.
Later again the opposite tendency began to prevail in many countries
and the liability of manufacturers and railroads was ikreased as
against that of other citizens and firms. Here again definite political
objectives were operative. 1,egislators wished to protect the poor,
the wage earners, and the peasants against the wealthy entrepreneurs
and capitalists.

652
Human Action
Whcther the proprietor's relief from responsibility for somc of
the disadvantages resulting from his conduct of affairs is the outcome of a deliberate policy on the part of governments and legislators
or whether it is an unintentional effect of the traditional wording of
laws, it is at any rate a datum which the actors must take into account.
They are faced with the problem of external costs. Then some people
choose certain modes of want-satisfaction merely on account of the
fact that a part of the costs incurred are debited not to them but to
other peopfe.
T h e extreme instance is provided by the case of no-man's property
referred to above.g If land is not owned by anybody, although legal
formalism may call it public property, it is utilized without any regard
to the disadvantages resulting. Those who are in a position to appropriate to themselves the returns-lumber and game of the forests,
fish of the water areas, and mineral deposits of the subsoil-do not
bother about the later effects of their mode of exploitation. For them
the erosion of the soil, the depletion of the exhaustible resources and
other impairments of the future utilization are external costs not
entering into their calculation of input and output. They cut dowm
the trees without any regard for fresh shoots or reforestation. In hunting and fishing they do not shrink from methods prcventing the repopulation of the hunting and fishing grounds. In the early days of
human civilization, when soil of a quality not inferior to that of the
utilized pieces was still abundant, people did not find any fault with
such predatory methods. When their effects appeared in a decrease
in the net returns, the ploughman abandoned his farm and moved
to another place. It was only when a country was more densely
settled and unoccupied first class land was no longer available for
appropriation, that people began to consider such predatory methods
wasteful. At that time they consolidated the institution of private
property in land. They started with arable land and then, step by
step, included pastures, forests, and fisheries. The newly settlcd
colonial countries overseas, especially the vast spaces of the United
States, whose marvelous agricultural potentialities were almost untouched when the first colonists from Europe arrived, passed through
the same stages. Until the last decades of the nineteenth century there
was always a geographic zone open to newcomers-the frontier.
Neither the existence of the frontier nor its passing was peculiar to
America. What characterizes American conditions is the fact that at
the time the frontier disappeared ideological and institutional factors
9. See above, p. 63j.

T h e Data of the Market
impeded the adjustment of the methods of land utilization to the
change in thc data.
In the central and western areas of continental Europe, where the
institution of private property had been rigidly established for many
centuries, things were different. There was no question of soil erosion
of formerly cultivated land. There was no problem of forest devastation in spite of the fact that the domestic forests had been for ages
the only source of lumber for construction and mining and of fuel
for heating and for the foundries and furnaces, the potteries and the
glass factories. The owners of the forests were impelled to conservation by their own selfish interests. In the most densely inhabited and
industrialized areas up to a few years ago between a fifth and a third
of the s ~ ~ r f a c
was
c still covered by first-class forests managed according to the methods of scientific forestry.1°
It is not the task of catallactic theory to elaborate an account of the
complex factors that produced modern American land-ownership
conditions. Whatever these factors were, they brought about a state
of affairs under which a great many farmers and the majority of the
lumbering enterprises had reason to consider the disadvantages resulting from the neglect of soil and forest conservation as external costs.ll
It is true that where a considerable part of the costs incurred are
external costs from the point of view of the acting individuals or
firms, the economic cakulation established by them is manifestly defective and their results deceptive. But this is not the outcome of
alleged deficiencies inherent in the system of private ownership of
the means of production. It is on the contrary a consequence of loopholes left in this system. It could be removed by a reform of the
laws concerning liability for damages inflictcd and by rescinding the
institutional barriers preventing the full operation of private ownership.
10. Late in the eighteenth century European governments began to enact laws
aiming at forest conservation. However, it would be a serious blunder to ascribe
t o these laws any role in the conservation of the forests. Before the middle of the
nineteenth century there was no administrative apparatus available for their enforcement. Besides the governments of Austria and Prussia, to say nothing of
those of the smaller German states, virtually lacked the power t o enforce such
laws against the aristocratic lords. N o civil servant before t914 would have been
bold enough to rouse the anger of a Bohemian o r Silesian magnate or a German
mediatized Standeshe~r.These princes and counts were spontaneously committed to forest conservation because they felt perfectly safe in the possession of
their property and were eager to preserve unabated the source of their revenues
and the market price of their estates.
1 1 . One could as well sav that they considered the advantages to be derived
from giving care to soil and forest conservation external economies.

654
Human Action
The case of external economies is not simply the inversion of the
case of external costs. It has its own domain and character.
If the results of an actor's action benefit not only himseIf, but also
other people, two alternatives are possible:
I . T h e planning actor considers the advantages which he expects
for himself so important that he is prepared to defray all the costs required. The fact that his project also benefits other people will not prevent him from accomplishing what promotes his own well-being.
When a railroad company erects dikes to protect its tracks against
snowslides and avalanches, it also protects the houses on adjacent
grounds. But the benefits which its neighbors will derive will not
hinder the company from embarking upon an expenditure that it
deems expedient.
2 . T h e costs incurred by a project are so great that none of those
whom it will benefit is ready to expend them in full. T h e project can
be realized only if a sufficient number of those interested in it share
in the costs.
I t would hardly be necessary to say more about external economies
if it were not for the fact that this phenomenon is entirely misinterpreted in currcnt pseudo-economic literature.
A project P is unprofitable when and because consumers prefer the
satisfaction expected from the realization of some other projects to
the satisfaction expected from the realization of P. T h e realization
of P would withdraw capital and labor from the realization of some
other projects for which the demand of the consumers is more urgent.
The layman and the pseudo-economist fail to recognize this fact. They
stubbornly refuse to notice the scarcity of the factors of production.
As they see it, P could be realized without any cost at all, i.e., without
foregoing any other satisfaction. It is merely the wantonness of the
profit system that prevents the nation from enjoying gratuitously the
pleasures expected from P.
Now, these short-sighted critics go on to say, the absurdity of the
profit system becomes especially outrageous if the unprofitability of
P is merely due to the fact that the entrepreneur's calculations neglect
those advantages of P which for them are external economies. From
the point of view of the whole of society such advantages are not
external. They benefit at least some members of society and would
increase "total welfare." 'The nonrealization of P is therefore a loss
for society. As profit-seeking business, entircly committed to selfishness, declines to embark upon such unprofitabIe projects, it is the
duty of government to fill the gap. Government should either run
them as public enterprises or it should subsidize them in order to

The Data of the Market

65 5
make them attractive for the private entrepreneur and investor. The
subsidies may be granted either directly by money grants from public
funds o r indirectly by means of tariffs the incidcncc of which falls
upon the buyers of the products.
However, the means which a government needs in order to run a
plant at a loss or to subsidize an unprofitable project must be withdrawn either from the taxpayers' spending and investing power or
from the loan market. The government has no more ability than
individuals to create something out of nothing. W h a t the govcrnment
spends more, the public spends Icss. Public works are not accomplished
by the miraculous power of a magic wand. Thcy are paid for by funds
taken away from the citizens. If the government had not intcrfcred,
the citizens would have employed thcm for the realization of profitpromising projccts the realization of which they must omit because
their means have been curtailcd by the government. For every unprofitable project that is realized b y the aid of the government there
is a corresponding project the realization of which is neglected inercly
on account of the govcrnment's intervention. Yet this nonrealized
projcct would have been profitable, i.e., it would have employed
the scarce means of production in accordance with the most urgent
needs of the consumers. From the point of view of the consumers the
employment of these means of production for the realization of an
unprofitable project is wasteful. I t deprives thein of satisfactions which
they prefer to those which the governmenc-sponsored project can
furnish them.
T h e gullible masses who cannot see beyond the immediate range of
their physical eyes are enraptured by the marvelous accomplishments
of their rulers. They fail to see that they themselves foot the bilI and
must consequently renounce many satisfactions which they would
have enjoyed if the governmcnt had spent less for unprofitable
projects. They have not the imagination to think of the possibilities
that the governmcnt has not allowed to come into e x i s t ~ n c c . ~ ~
Thcse enthusiasts are still more bewildered if the government's
interference enables submarginal producers to continue producing
and to stand the competition of more efficient plants, shops, or farms.
Here, they say, it is obvious that total production is increased and
something is added to the wealth that would not have been produced
without the assistance of the authorities. What happens in fact is
just the opposite; the magnitude of total production and of total wealth
is curtailed. Outfits producing at higher costs are brought into existI 2. Cf. the brilliant analysis of public spending in Henry Hazlitt's book Economics in One Lesson ( N e w York, ly46), pp. 19-29.

656
Human Action
ence or preserved while other outfits producing at Iower costs are
forced to curtail or to discontinue their production. The consumers
are not getting more, but less.
There is, for instance, the very popular idea that it is a good thing
for the government to promote the agricultural development of those
parts of the country which nature has poorly endowed. Costs of
production are higher in these districts than in other areas; it is
precisely this fact that qualifies a large part of their soil as submarginal.
When unaided by public funds, the farmers tilling these submarginal
lands could not stand the competition of the more fertile farms.
Agriculture would shrink or fail to develop and the whole area would
become a backward part of the country. In full cognizance of this
state of affairs profit-seeking business avoids investing in the construction of railroads connecting such inauspicious areas with the centers
of consumption. The plight of the farmers is not caused by the fact
that they lack transportation facilities. The causation is the other
way round; because business realizes that the prospects for these
farmcrs are not propitious, it abstains from investing in railroads which
are likely to become unprofitable for lack of a sufficient amount of
goods to be shipped. If the government, yielding to the demands of
the interested pressure groups, builds the railroad and runs it at a
deficit, it certainly benefits the owners of farm land in those poor
districts of the country. As a part of the costs that the shipping of
their products requires is borne by the treasury, they find it easier
to compete with those tilling more fertile land to whom such aid
is denied. But the boon of these privileged farmers is paid for by the
taxpayers who must provide the funds required to defray the deficit.
It affects neither the market price nor the total available supply of
agricultural products. It merely makes profitable the operation of
farms which hitherto were submarginal and makes other farms, the
operation of which was hitherto profitable, submarginal. It shifts
production from land requiring lower costs to land requiring higher
costs. it does not increase totai suppiy and weaith, it curtalis them,
as the additional amounts of capital and labor required for the cultivation of high-cost fields instead of low-cost fields are withheld from
enlploymcnts in which they would have made possible the production
of some other consumers' goods. The government attains its end of
benefiting some parts of the country with what they would have
missed, but it produces somewhere else costs which exceed these
gains of a privileged group.

The Data of the Market
The Externlrl Economies of Intellectual Creation
The extreme case of external economies is shown in the "production" of
the intellectua1groundwork of every kind of processing and constructing.
The characteristic mark of recipes, i.e., the mental devices directing the
technological procedures, is the inexhaustibility of the services they render.
These services are consequently not scarce, and there is no need to economize their employment. Those considerations that resulted in the establishment of the institution of private ownership of economic goods did not
refer to them. They remained outside the sphere of private property not
because they are immaterial, intangible, and-impalpable, but because their
serviceableness cannot be exhausted.
People began to realize only later that this state of affairs has its drawbacks too. It places the producers of such recipes--cspeciaIly the inventors
of technological procedures and authors and composers-in a peculiar
position. They are burdened with the costs of production, while the services of the product they have created can be gratuitously enjoyed by
everybody. What they produce is for them either entirely or almost entirely external economies.
If there are neither copyrights nor patents, the inventors and authors
are in the position of an entrepreneur. They have a temporary advantage
as against other people. As they start sooner in utilizing their invention or
their manuscript themselves or in making it available for use to other people
(manufacturers or publishers), they have the chance to earn profits in the
time interval until everybody can likewise utilize it. As soon as the invention or the content of the book are publicIy known, they become "free
goods" and the inventor or author has only his glory.
The problem involved has nothing to do with the activities of the creative
genius. These pioneers and originators of things unheard of do not produce
and work in the sense in which these terms are employed in dealing with
the affairs of other people. They do not let themselves be influenced by
the response their work meets on the part of their contemporaries. They
do not wait for encouragement.13
It is different with the broad class of professional intellectuals whose
scrvices socicq- caiiiiot do withotit 'iVe may disregard the
of
second-rate authors of poems, fiction, and plays and second-rate composers
and need not inquire whether it would be a serious disadvantage for mankind to lack the products of their efforts. But it is obvious that handing
down knowledge to the rising generation and familiarizing the acting individuals with the amount of knowledge they need for the realization of
their plans requires textbooks, manuals, handbooks, and other nonfiction
works. It is unlikely that people would undertake the laborious task of
writing such publications if everyone were free to reproduce them. This is
still more manifest in the field of technological invention and discovery.
13. See above, pp. 138-140.

Human Action

693

The extensive experimentation necessary for such achievements is often
very expensive. It is very probable that technological progress would be
seriously retarded if, for the inventor and for those who defray the expenses incurred by his experimentation, the results obtained were nothing
but externaI economies.
Patents and copyrights are results of the legal evolution of the last centuries. Their place in the traditional body of property rights is still controversial. People look askance at them and deem them irregular. They
are considered privileges, a vestige of the rudimentary period of their
evolution when legal protection was accorded to authors and inventors
only by virtue of an exceptional privilege granted by the authorities. They
are suspect, as they arc lucrative only if they make it possible to sell at
monopoly prices.14 Moreover, the fairness of patent laws is contested on
the ground that they reward only those who put the finishing touch leading to practical utilization of achievements of many predecessors. These
precursors go empty-handed although their contribution to the final result
was often much more weighty than that of the patentee.
It is beyond the scope of catallactics to enter into an examination of the
arguments brought forward for and against the institution of copyrights
and patents. It has merely to stress the point that this is a problem of the
delimitation of property rights and that with the abolition of patents and
copyrights authors and inventors would for the most part be producers of
external economies.

Privileges and Quasi-privileges
The restrictions which laws and institutions impose upon the discretion
to choose and to act arc not always so insurmountable that they could not
be overcome under certain conditions. T o some favorites exemption from
the obligation binding the rest of the people may be granted as an explicit
privilege either by the laws themselves or by an administrative act of the
authorities entrusted with the law's enforcement. Some may be ruthIess
enough to defy the laws in spite of the vigilance of the authorities; their
daring insolence secures them a quasi-privilege.
A law that nobody observes is ineffectual. A law that is not valid for all
or which not all obey, may grant to those who are exempt-whether by
virtue of the law itself or by virtue of their own audacity-the opportunity
to reap either differential rent or monopoly gains.
With regard to the determination of the market phenomena it does not
matter whether the exemption is legally valid as a privilege or illegal as a
quasi-privilege. Neither does it matter whether the costs, if any, incurred
by the favored individual or firm for the acquisition of the privilege or
quasi-privilege are legal (e.g., a tax levied on licensees) or illegal (e.g.,
bribes paid to corrupt officers). If an importation embargo is mitigated by
the importation of a certain quantity, the prices are affected by the quantity
14. See above, pp. 360-361.

T h e Data of the Market

659

imported and the specific costs incurred by the acquisition and the utilization of the privilege or quasi-priyilege. But whether the importation was
legal (e.g., a license granted under the system of quantitative trade control
to some privileged people), or illegal contraband does not affect the price
structure.

XXIV. HARMONY AND CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
I.

T h e Ultimate Source of Profit and Loss on the Market

HE changes in the data whose reiterated emergence prevents the

T

econoniic system from turning into an evenly rotating economy
and produces again and again entrepreneurial profit and loss are favorable to some members of society and unfavorable to others. Hence,
people concluded, the gain of one nzan is the damage of another; n o
man profits but by the loss of others. This dogma was already advanced by certain ancient authors. Among modern writers Montaigne
was the first to restate it; we may fairly call it the Montnigne dogma.
It was the quintessence of the doctrines of Mercantilism, old and
new. It is at the bottom of all modern doctrines teaching that there
prevails, within the frame of the market economy, an irreconcilable
conflict among the interests of various social classes within a nation
and furthermore between the interests of any nation and those of all
other nati0ns.l
Now the Montaigne dogma is true with regard to the effects of
cash-induced changes in the purchasing power of money on deferred
payments. But it is entirely wrong with regard to any kind of entrepreneurial profit or loss, whether they emerge in a stationary economy
in which the total amount of profits equals the total amount of losses
or in a progressing or a retrogressing economy in which these two
magnitudes arc different.
What produces a man's profit in the course of affairs within an
i.lnh2mpere?. m2&et sgciery is figt his fe!!axJ.r
citizer?'s nr-sUl i n h t anrl
distress, but the fact that healleviates or entirely removes what causes
his fellow citizen's feeling of uneasiness. What hurts the sick is the
plague, not the physician who treats the disease. The doctor's gain
is not an outcome of the epidemics, but of the aid he gives to those
affected. The ultimate source of profits is always the foresight of
future conditions. Those who succeeded better than others in antici-

---

Cf. Montaigne, Essais, ed. F. Strowski, Bk. I, chap. 2 2 (Bordeaux, 19061,I,
A. Onckcn, Geschichte der Natiowlokonomie (Leipzig, 1902)~pp. I 52153; E. F. Heckscher, hfercantilimz, transl. by M . Shapiro (London, 1g35), 11,
I.

I 35-136;

26-27.

Harmony and Conflict of Inte~ests

66 I

pating future events and in adjusting their activities to the future state
of the market, reap profits because they are in a position to satisfy the
most urgent needs of the public. The profits of those who have produced goods and services for which the buyers scramble are not the
source of the losses of those who have brought to the market commodities in the purchase of which the public is not prepared to pay
the full amount of production costs expended. These losses are caused
by the lack of insight displayed in anticipating the future demand
of the consumers.
External events affecting demand and supply may sometimes come
so suddenly and unexpectedly that people say that no reasonable man
could have foreseen them. Then the envious may consider the profits
of those who gain from the change as unjustified. Yet such arbitrary
value judgments do not alter the real state of interests. It is certain$
better for a sick man to be cured by a doctor for a high fee than to
lack medical assistance. If it were otherwise, he would not consult the
physician.
There are in the market economy no conflicts between the interests
of the buyers and sellers. There are disadvantages caused by inadequate foresight. It would be a universal boon if every ma; and all
the members of the market society would always foresee future conditions correctly and in time and act accordingly. If this were the case,
retrospection would establish that no particle of capital and labor
was wasted for the satisfaction of wants which now are considered
as less urgent than some other unsatisfied wants. However, man is
not omniscient.
It is wrong to look at these problems from the point of view of
resentment and envy. It is no less faulty to restrict one's observation
to the momentary position of various individuals. These are social
problems and must be judged with regard to the operation of the
whole market system. What secures the best possible satisfaction of
the demands of each member of society is precisely the fact that those
who succeeded better than other people in anticipating future conditions are earning profits. If profits were to be curtailed for the benefit
of those whom a change in the data has injured, the adjustment of
supply to demand would not be improved but impaired. If one were
to prevent doctors from occasionally earning high fees, one would not
increase but rather decrease the number of those choosing the medical
profession.
The deaI is always advantageous both for the buyer and the seller.
Even a man who sells at a Ioss is still better off than he would be if
he could not sell at all, or only at a still lower price. H e loses on account

66 2

Human Action

of his lack of foresight; the sale limits his loss even if rhe price received is low. If both the buyer and the seller were not to consider the
transaction as the most advantageous action they could choose under
the prevailing conditions, they would not enter into the deal.
The statement that one man's boon is the other man's damage is
valid with regard to robbery, war, and booty. T h e robber's plunder
is the damage of the despoiled victim. But war and commerce are
two different things. Voltaire erred whcn-in I 76+--hc wrote in the
article "Patrie" of his Dictionmire philosophique: "To be a good
patriot is to wish that onc's own community should enrich itself by
trade and acquire power b y arms; it is obvious that a country cannot
profit but at the cxpense of another and that it cannot conquer without inflicting harm on other people." Voltaire, like so many other
authors who preceded and followed him, deemed it superfluous to
familiarize himself with economic thought. If he had read the essays
of his contemporary David Ilume, he would have learned how false
it: is to idcntify war and foreign trade. VoItaire, the great debunker
of age-o!d superstitions and popular fallacics, fell prey unawares to
the most disastrous fallacy.
When the baker provides the dentist with bread and the dcntist
relieves rhe baker's toothache, neither the baker nor the dentist is
harmed. It is wrong to consider such an exchange of services and
the pillage of the baker's shop by armed gangsters as two manifestations of the same thing. Foreign trade differs from domestic trade
only in so far as goods and services are exchanged beyond the borderlines separating the territories of two sovereign nations. It is monstrous that l'rince Louis Kapoleon Bonaparte, the later Ernperor
Napoleon 111, should have writtcn many decades after Hume, Adam
Smith, and Ricardo: "The quantity of merchandise which a country
exports is always in direct proportion to the number of shells it can
discharge upon its enemics whenever its honor and its dignity may
require it." ' All the teachings of economics concerning the effects
of the international division of labor and of international trade have
up to now failed to destroy the popularity of the Mercantilist fallacy,
"that the object of forcign trade is to pauperize foreigners." It is
a task of historical investigation to disclose the sources of the popularity of this and other similar delusions and errors. For economics
the matter is long since settled.
2 . Cf. Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, Extinction dzc pauperisme (6d. populaire,
Paris, I 848), p. 6.
3. With these words H. G. Wells ( T h e W o r l d of William Clissold, Bk. IV,
sec. 1 0 ) characterizes the opinion of a typical representative of the British peerage.

Har~nonyand Conflict of lnterests
2.

The Limitation of Offspring

T h e natural scarcity of the means of sustenance forces every living
being to look upon all other living beings as deadly foes in the struggle
f o r survival, and generates pitiless biological competition. Rut with
Inan these irreconcilable conflicts of interests disappear when, and
as far as, the division of labor is substituted for economic autarky of
individuals, families, tribes, and nations. Within the system of society
there is no conflict of interests as long as the optimum size of population has not been reached. As long as the employment of additional
hands resuIts in a more than proportionate increase in the returns,
harmony of interests is substituted for conflict. People are no longer
rivals in the struggle for the allocation of portions out of a strictly
limited supply. T h e y become cooperators in striving after ends common to all of them. An increase in population figures does not curtail,
but rather augments, the average shares of the individuals.
If men were t o strive only after nourishment and sexuaI satisfaction,
population wo~lldtend to increase beyond the optimum size to the
limits drawn by the sustenance available. However, men want more
than merely to live and to copulate; they want to live humanly. An
improvement in conditions usually results, it is true, in an increase
in population figures; but this increase lags bchind the increase in
bare sustenance. If it were otherwise, men would have never succeeded in the establishment of social bonds and in the development of
civilization. As with rats, mice, and microbes, every increase in sustenance would have made population figures rise to the limits of
bare sustenance; nothing would have been left for the seeking of
other ends. T h e fundamental error implied in the iron law of wages
was precisely the fact that it looked upon men-or at least upon the
wage earners-as beings exclusively driven b y animal impulses. Its
champions failed to rcalize that man differs from the beasts as far as
he aims aiso at specificaiiy human ends, whlch one may call higher
o r more sublime ends.
T h e Malthusian law of population is one of the great achievements
of thought. Together with the principle of the division of labor it
provided the foundations for modern biology and for the theory of
evolution; the importance of these two fundamental theorems for
the sciences of human action is second only to the discovery of the
regularity in the intertwinement and sequence of market phenomena
and their inevitable determination b y the market data. T h e objections
raised against the Malthusian law as well as against the law of returns

664
Human Action
are vain and trivial. Both laws are indisputable. But the role to be
assigned to them within the body of the sciences of human action
is different from that which Malthus attributed to them.
Nonhuman beings are entirely subject to the operation of the biological law described b y Malthus.' For them the statement that their
numbers tend to encroach upon the means of subsistence and that
the supernumerary specimens arc weeded out by want of sustenance
is valid without any exception. W i t h reference to the nonhuman
animals the notion of minimum sustenance has an unequivocal,
uniquely determined sense. But the case is different with man. Man
integrates the satisfaction of the purely zoological impulses, common
to all animals, into a scale of values, in which a place is also assigned to
specifically human ends. Acting man also rationalizes the satisfaction
of his sexual appetites. Their satisfaction is the outcome of a weighing
of pros and cons. Man does not blindIy submit to a sexual stimulation
like a bulI; he refrains from copulation if he deems the costs-the
anticipated disadvantages-too high. In this sense we may, without
any valuation or ethical connotation, apply the term 7~70ralrestraint
employed by Rilalth~s.~
Rationalization of sexual intercourse already involves the rationalization of proliferation. Then later further methods of rationalizing
the increase of progeny were adopted which were independent of
abstention from copulatiol~.People resorted to the egregious and repulsive practices of exposing or killing infants and of abortion. Finally
they learned to perform the sexual act in such a way that no pregnancy
resblts. In the last hundred years the technique of contraccptivc
devices has been perfected and the frequency of their employment
increased considerably. Yet the procedures had long been ltnown
and practiced.
T h e wealth that modern capitalism bestows upon the broad masses
of the capitalist countries and the improvement in hygienic conditions and therapeutical and prophylactic methods brought about by
capitalism have considerably reduced mortality, especially infant
mortality, and prolonged the average duration of life. Today in these
countries the restriction in generating offspring can succeed only if
4. T h e Malthusian law is, of course, a biological and not a praxeological law.
I-Iowever, its cognizance is indispensable for praxeology in order to conceive b y
contrast the essential characteristic of human action. As the natural sciences
failed to discover it, the economists had t o fill the gap. T h e history of the law of
populatiori too explodes the popular myth about the backwardness of the sciences
of human action and their need to borrow from the natural sciences.
5. MaIthus too employed this term without any valuational or ethical implication. Cf. Ronar, Malthw and His W o r k (London, 1885), p. 53. One could as well
substitute the term praxeological restraint for moral restraint.

Harmony and Conflict of Interests

665

it is more drastic than in earlicr ages. The transition to capitalism-i.e.,
the removal of the obstacles which in former days had fettered the
functioning of private initiative and enterprise-has consequently
deeply influenced sexual customs. It is not the practice of birth controI
that is new, but merely the fact that it is more frequently resorted to.
Especially new is the fact that the practice is no longer limited to the
upper strata of the population, but is common to the whole population. For it is onc of the most important social effects of capitalism
that it deproletarianizes all strata of society. It raises the standard of
living of the masses of the manual workers to such a height that they
too turn into "bourgeois" and think and act like well-to-do burghers.
Eager to preserve their standard of living for themselves and for their
children, they embark upon birth control. With the spread and
progress of capitalism, birth control becomes a universal practice.
T h e transition to capitalism is thus accompanied by two phenomena:
a decline both in fertility rates and in mortality rates. T h e average
duration of life is prolonged.
In the days of Malthus it was not yet possible to observe these
demographical characteristics of capitalism. Today it is no longer
permissible to question them. But: blinded by romantic prepossessions,
many describe them as phenomena of decline and degeneration peculiar only to the white-skinned peoples of Western civilization, grown
old and decrepit. These romantics are seriously alarmed by the fact
that the Asiatics do not practice birth controf t o the same extent t o
which it is practiced in Western Europe, North America, and
Australia. As modern methods of fighting and preventing disease have
brought about a drop in mortality rates with these oriental peoples
too, their population figures grow more rapidly than those of the
Western nations. Will not the indigencs of India, Malaya, China, and
Japan, who themselves did not contribute to the technological and
therapeutical achievements of the West, but received them as an unexpected present, in the end by the sheer superiority of their numbers
squeeze out the peoples of European descent?
These fears are groundless. Historical esperiencc shows that all
Caucasian peoples reacted to the drop in mortality figures brought
about by capitalism with a drop in the birth rate. Of course, from
such historical experience no general law may bc deduced. Bat
praxeologicaf reflection demonstrates that there exists between these
two phenomena a necessary concatenation. An improvement in the
external conditions of we1l:being makes possible a corresponding increase in population figures. However, if the additional quantity of
the means of sustenance is completely absorbed by rearing an addi-

666
Human Actzon
tional number of people, nothing is left for a further improvement
in the btandard of living. T h e march of civilization is arrested; mankind rcaches a state of stagnation.
?'he case bccomes still more obvious if we assurnc that a prophylactic invcntion is made by a lucky chancc and that its practical application requires neither a considerable investment of capital nor considerable current expenditure. Of course, modern medical rescarch and
still more its utilization absorb huge amounts of capital and labor.
T h c y are product5 of capitalism. T h e y would nevcr have come into
cxistcncc in a noncapitalist environment. But there were, in earlier
days, instances of a different character. T h e practice of smallpox
inoculation did not originate from expensive laboratory rcscarch
and, in its original crude form, could be applied at trifling costs. S o w ,
what would the rcsults of smallpox inoculation have bcen if its practice had become gcneral in a prccapitalist country not comn.litted
to birth control? It would have increascd population figures without
incrcasing sustenance, it would have impaircd the average standard
of living. I t would not have been a blessing, but a cursc.
Conditions in Asia and Africa are, by and large, thc samc. These
backward peoples receivc the devices for fighting and preventing
disease ready-madc from thc West. Often they are not even charged
for the drugs, the hospital cquipment, and theservices of the doctors.
The Whitcs defray thc costs, sometimes out of humanitarian considerations, somcti&es iinpclled b y thcir own intcrcsts. I t is true that
in some of thcse countries imported forcign capital and the adoption
of foreign technological methods b y the comparatively sn~alldorncstic
capital synchronously tend to increase the per capita output of labor
and thus to bring about a tendency toward an improvenlent in the
average standard of living. However, this does not suficiently
counterbalancc the opposite tendency resulting from the drop in
mortality rates not accompanied by an adequate fall in fertility rates.
T h e contact with the West has not yet benefited thcse peoples because it has not yet affected thcir minds; it has not freed them from
age-old superstitions, prejudices, and misapprehensions; it has rnerely
altcred their technological and therapcutical knowledge.
T h e reformers of the oriental pcoplcs want to secure for thcir
fcllow citizens the matcrial well-being that the Western nations enjoy.
Deluded by Marxian, nationalist, and militarist ideas they think that
all that is ;ceded for the attainment of this end is the introduction
of European and American tcchnology. Ncither thc Slavonic Bolsheviks and nationalists nor their sympathizers in the Indies, in China,
and in Japan realize that what their peoples need most is not Western

Flu~wzonyand Conflict of Interests

667

technolog?-, but the social order which in addition to other achievements has generated this technological knowledge. They lack first
of all economic freedom and private initiative, entrepreneurs and
capitalism. But they look only for engineers and machines. What
separates East and West is the social and economic system. The East
is foreign to the Western spirit that has created capitalism. It is of
no use to import the paraphernalia of capitalism without admitting
capitalism as such. T\To achievement of capitalist civilization would
have been accon~plishedin a noncapitalistic environment or can be
preserved in a world withottt a market economy.
If the Asiatics really enter into the orbit of Western civiIization,
they will have to adopt the market economy without reservations.
Then their masses will rise above their present proletarian wretchedness and practice birth control as it is practiced in every capitalistic
country. No excessive growth of population wilI longer hinder the
improvement in the standards of living. But if the oriental peoples
in the future confine themselves to mechanical reception of the
tangible achievements of the West without embracing its basic
philosophy and social ideologies, they will forever remain in their
present state of inferiority and destitution. Their populations may
increase considerably, but they will not raise themselves above distress. These miserable masses of paupers will certainly not be a serious
menace to the independence of the Western nations. As long as there
is a need for weapons, the entrepreneurs of the market society will
never stop producing more efficient weapons and thus securing to
their countrymen a superiority of equipment over the merely imitative noncapitalistic Orientals. The military events of both World
Wars have proved anew that the capitalistic countries arc paramount
also in armaments production. N o foreign aggressor can destroy
capitalist civilization if it does not destroy itself. Where capitalistic
entrepreneurship is allowed to function freely, the fighting forces
will always be so well equipped that the biggest armies of the backward peoples will be no match for them. There has even been great
exaggeration of the danger of making the forn~ulasfor manufacturing
secret" weapons universally known. If war comes again, the searching mind of the capitalistic world will always have a head start on
the peoples who merely copy and imitate clumsily.
The peoples who have developed the system of market economy
arid cling to it arc in every respect superior to all other peoples. The
fact that they are eager to preserve peace is not a mark of their weakness and inability to wage war. They love peace because they know
that armed conflicts are pernicious and disintegrate the social division
<I

668

Human Action

of labor. But if war becomes unavoidable, they show their superior
efficiency in military affairs too. T h c y repel the barbarian aggressors
whatcve; their numbers may be.
T h e purposive adjustment of the birth rate t o the supply of the
material potentialities of well-being is an indispensable condition of
human life and action, of civilization, and of any improvement in
wealth and welfare. Whether the only beneficial method of birth
control is abstention from coitus is a question which must be decided
from the point of view of bodily and mental hygiene. It is absurd to
confuse the issue by referring to ethical precepts developed in ages
which were faced with different conditions. However, praxeology
is not interested in the theological aspects of the problem. I t has merely
to establish the fact that where there is no limitation of offspring
there cannot be any question of civilization and improvement in the
standard of living.
A socialist commonwealth would be under the necessity of regulating the fertility rate by authoritarian control. I t would have to regiment the sexual life of its wards no less than all other spheres of their
conduct. In the market economy every individual is spontaneously
intent upon not begetting children whom he could not rear without
considerably lowering his family's standard of life. Thus the growth
of population t)eyond the optimum size as determined b y the supply
of capital available and the state of technological knowledge is
checked. T h e interests of each individual coincide with those of all
other individuals.
Those fighting birth control want to eliniinate a device indispensable for the preservation of peaceful human cooperation and
the socia1 division of labor. Where the average standard of living is
impaired by the excessive increase in population figures, irreconcilable
conflicts of interests arise. Each individual is again a rival of all other
individuals in the struggle for survival. T h e annihilation of rivals is
the only m a n s of increasing one's own well-being. T h c philosophers
and theologians who assert that birth control is contrary to the laws of
God and Nature refuse to see things as they really are. Nature straitens
the material means required for the improvement of human wellbeing and survival. As natural conditions are, man has only the choice
betsvccn the pitiless war of each against each or social cooperation.
But social cooperation is impossible if peopIe give rein t o the natural
impulse of proliferation. In restricting procreation man adjusts himself t o the natural conditions of his existence. T h e rationalization of
the sexual passions is an indispensable condition of civilization and
societal bonds. Its abandonment would in the long run not increase

Harmony and Conflict of Interests

669

but decrease the numbers of those surviving, and would render life
for everyone as poor and miserable as it was many thousands of years
ago for our ancestors.

3. T h e Harmony of the "Rightly Understood" Interests
From time immemorial men have prattled about the blissful conditions their ancestors enjoyed in the original "state of nature." From old
myths, fabies, and poems the image of this primitive happiness passed
into many popular philosophies of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. In their language the term natural denoted what was good
and beneficial in human affairs, while the term civilization had the
connotation of opprobrium. T h e fall of man was seen in the deviation
from the primitive conditions of ages in which there was but little
difference between man and other animals. A t that time, these romantic eulogists of the past asserted, there were no conflicts between
men. Peace was undisturbed in the Garden of Eden.
Yet nature does not generate peace and good will. T h e characteristic mark of the "state of nature" is irreconcilable conflict. Each
specimen is the rival of all other specimens. T h e means of subsistence
are scarce and do not grant survival to all. T h e conflicts can never
disappear. If a band of men, united with the object of defeating rival
bands, succeeds in annihilating its foes, new antagonisms arise among
the victors over the distribution of the booty. The source of the
conflicts is always thc fact that each man's portion curtails the portions
of all other men. This is a dilemma that does not allow of any peaceful
solution.
What makes friendly relations between human beings possible is
the higher productivity of the division of labor. I t removes the natural
conflict of interests. For where there is division of labor, therc is
no longer question of the distribution of a supply not capable of enlargement. Thanks to thc higher productivity of labor performed
under the division of tasks, the supply of goods multiplies. A preeminent common interest, the preservation and further intensification of social cooperation, becomes paramount and obliterates all
essential collisions. Catallactic competition is substituted for biological competition. It makes for harmony of the interests of all
members of society. The very condition from which the irreconcilable
conflicts of biological competition arise-viz., the fact that all people
b y and large strive after the same things-is transformed into a factor
making for harmony of interests. Because many people or even all
people want bread, clothes, shoes, and cars, large-scale production

670
Human Action
of these goods becomes fcasible and reduces the costs of production
to such an cxtent that they are accessible at low prices. T h e fact that
my fellow man wants to acquire shoes as I do, does not make it harder
for me to get shoes, but easier. W h a t enhances the price of shoes
is the fact that nature does not provide a more ample supply of leather
and other raw materials required, and that one must submit to the
disutility of labor in order to transform thesc raw materials into shoes.
T h e catallactic competition of those who, like me, are eager to have
shoes makes shoes cheaper, not more expensive.
This is the meaning of the theorem of the harmony of the rightly
understood interests of all members of the market s o ~ i e t y .W~ h e n
the classical economists made this statement, they werc trying to
stress two points: First, that everybody is interested in the preservation of the social division of labor, the systern that multiplies the
productivity of human efforts. Second, that in the market society
consumers' demand ultimately directs all production activities. T h e
fact that not all human wants can be satisfied is not due to inappropriate social institutions o r to deficiencies of the system of the
market economy. It is a natural condition of human life. T h e belief
that nature bestows upon man inexhaustible riches and that misery
is an outgrowth of man's failure to organizc the good society is cntirely fallacious. T h e "state of nature" which the reformers and
utopians dcpicted as paradisiac was in fact a state of extreme poverty
and distress. "Poverty," says Bentham, "is not the work of the laws,
it is the primitive condition of the human race." Even those at the
base of the social pyramid arc much better off than they would have
been in the absence of social cooperation. T h e y too arc benefited by
the operation of the market economy and participate in the advantages of civilized society.
T h e nineteenth-century rcformers did not drop thc cherishcd fable
of the originaI earthly paradise. Frederick Engels incorporated it in
the Marxian account of mankind's social evolution. Ilowever, they
no ionger set up the bliss of the aurea aetas as a pattern for sociai and
economic reconstruction. They contrast the alleged depravity of
capitalism with the ideal happiness man will enjoy in the socialist
Elysium of the future. The socialist mode of produ&on will abolish
the fetters b y means of which capitalism checks the development of
the productive forces, and will increase the productivity of labor
and wealth beyond all measure. T h e prcservation of free enterprise
6. For "rightly understood" interests we may as well say interests "in the long
run."
7. Cf. Bentham, Principles of the Civil Code, in "Works," I , jog.

Harmony and Conflict of interests

671
and the private oumership of the means of production benefits exclusively the small minority of parasitic cxploitcrs and harms the
immense majority of working men. Hence there prevails within the
frame of the market society an irreconcilable conflict between the
interests of "capital" and thosc of "labor." This class struggle can disappear only when a fair system of social organization-either socialism
or interventionism-is substituted for the manifestly unfair capitalist
mode of production.
Such is the alrnost universally accepted social philosophy of our
age. It was not created b y Marx, although it owes its popularity
mainly to the writings of Marx and the Ailarxians. It is today endorsed
not only by the Marxians, but no less b y most of those parties who
emphatically declare their anti-Marxism and pay lip service t o free
enterprise. It is the official social philosophy of Roman CathoIicism
as well as of Anglo-Catholicism; it is supported b y many eminent
champions of the various Protestant denominations and of the Orthodox Oriental Church. It is an essential part of the teachings of Italian
Fascism and of German Nazism and of all varieties of interventionist
doctrines. I t was the ideology of the Sozialpolitik of the Hohcnzollerns in Germany and the French royalists aiming at the restoration of
the house of Bourbon-OrlCans, of the N e w Ileal of President Roosevelt, and of the nationalists of Asia and Latin America. T h e antagonisms between these parties and factions refer to accidental issuessuch as religious dogma, constitutional institutions, foreign policyand, first of all, t o the characteristic features of the social system that
is to be substituted for capitalism. But they all agree in the fundamental thesis that the very existence of the capitalist system harms the
vital interests of the immense majority of workers, artisans, and small
farmers, and they all ask in the name of social justice for the abolition
of ~apitalism.~
8. The officiaI doctrine of the Roman Church is outlined in the encyclical
Quadragesirno anno of Pope Pius XI (1931). T h e Anglo-Catholic doctrine is
presented by the late William Temple, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the book
Christianity and the Social Order (Penguin Special, 1942). Representative of the
ideas of European continental Protestantism is the book of Elnil Brunner, Justice
and the Social Order, trans. by M . Hottingcr (New York, 1945). A highly significant document is the section on "The Church 2nd Disorder of Society" of the
draft report which the World Council of Churches in September, 1948 recommended for appropriate action to the one hundred and fifty odd denominations
whose delegates are members of the Council. For the ideas of Nicolas Berdyaew,
the most eminent apologist of Russian Orthodoxy, cf. his book T h e Origin of
Russian C o 7 n m n i m (London, 1937)~especially pp. 217-2 18 and 225. It is often
asserted that an essential differencc between the Marxians and the other socialist
and interventionist parties is to be found in the fact that the Marxians stand for
class struggle, while the latter parties look at the class struggle as upon a deplorable outgrowth of the irreconcilable conflict of class interests inherent in capital-

672
Human Action
All socialist and interventionist authors and politicians base their
analysis and critique of the market economy on two fundamentaI
errors. First, they fail to recognize the speculative character inherent
in all endeavors to provide for future want-satisfaction, i.e., in all
human action. They na'ively assume that there cannot exist any doubt
about the measures to be applied for the best possible provisioning
of the consumers. In a socialist commonwealth there will be no need
for the production tsar (or the central board of production management) to speculate. He will "simply" have to resort to those measures
which are beneficial to his wards. The advocates of a planned economy have never conceived that the task is to provide for future wants
which may differ from today's wants and to employ the various availabIe factors of production in the most expedient way for the best
possible satisfaction of these uncertain future wants. They have not
conceived that the problem is to allocate scarce factors of ;reduction
to the various branches of production in such a way that no wants
considered more urgent should remain unsatisfied because the factors
of production required for their satisfaction were employed, ix.,
wasted, for the satisfaction of wants considered less urgent. This
economic problem must not be confused with the technological
protdem. TechnologicaI knowledge can merely tell us what could
be achieved under the present state of our scientific insight. It does not
answer the questions as to what should be produced and in what quantities, and which of the 'muItitude of technological processes available
should be chosen. Deluded by their failure to grasp this essential
matter, the advocates of a planned society believe that the production
tsar will never err in his decisions. In the market econon~ythe entrepreneurs and capitalists cannot avoid committing serious blunders
hecause they know neither what the consumers want nor what their
competitors are doing. The general n~anagerof a socialist state will be
infallible because he alone wilI have the power to determine what
should be produced and how, and because no action of other people
wl!! cress his p!ans."
The second fundamental error involved in the socialists1 critique
of the market economy stems from their faulty theory of wages.
ism and want to overcome it by the realization of the reforms they recommend.
However, the Marxians do not praise and kindle the class struggle fur its own
sake. In their eyes the class struggle is good only because it is the device by means
of which the "productive forces," those mysterious forces directing rhe course
of human evolution, are bound to bring about the "classless" society in which
there will be neither classes nor class conflicts.
9. T h e thorough exposure of this delusion is provided by thc proof of the impossibility of economic calculation under socialism. See below the fifth part of
this book.

Harmony and Conpict of Inte~ests

67 3
They have failed to realize that wages are the price paid for the wagc
earner's achicvcment, i.e., for the contribution of his efforts to the
processing of the good conccrned or, as people say, for the value
which his services add to the value of the materials. No matter whether
thcre are time wages or piece work wages, the employer always buys
the worker's performance and services, not his time. It is therefore
not true that in the unhampered market economy the worker has
no personal interest in thc execution of his task. T h e socialists are
badly mistaken in assertiilg that those paid a certain rate per hour,
per day, per week, per month, or per year are not impelled by thcir
own selfish interests when they work efficiently. I t is not lofty ideals
and the sense of duty that deter a worker paid according to the length
of time worked from carclcssness and loafing around the shop, but
vcry substantial arguments. H e who works more and bettcr gets higher
pay, and he who wants to earn more must increase the quantity and
improve the quality of his pcrformance. T h e hard-boiled enlployers
arc not so gullible as to let themselves be cheated by slothful employees; they are not so negligent as those governments who pap
salaries t o hosts of loafing bureaucrats. Neither arc the wage earners
so stupid as not to know that laziness and incfticicncy are heavily
penalized on the labor markct.1°
On the shaky ground of thcir misconception of the catallactic nature
of wages, the socialist authors havc advanced fantastic fablcs about the
increase in thc productivity of labor to bc expected from the realization of their plans. Under capitalism, thcy say, the worker's zeal is
seriously impaired because he is aware of the fact that he himself
does not rcap the fruits of his labor and that his toil and trouble enrich
merely his employer, this parasitic and idle exploiter. nut under
socialism every worker will know that he works for the benefit of
society, of which he himself is a part. This knowledge will provide
him Gith the most powerful incentive to do his best. An enormous
increase in the productivity of labor and thereby in wealth will result.
However, the idcntification of the interests of each worker and
those of the socialist commonwealth is a purely leplistic and formalistic fiction which has nothing to do with the real state of affairs. JVhile
the sacrifices an individual worker makes in intensifying his own exertion burdcn him alone, only an infinitesimal fraction of the produce
of his additional exertion benefits himself and improves his own wellbeing. While thc individual worl~erenjoys completely the pleasures
he may reap by yielding to the temptation to carclessness and ladness,
the resulting impairment of thc social dividend curtails his own sharc
10.

Cf. above, pp. 598430.

674
Human Action
only infinitesimally. Under such a socialist mode of production all
personal incentives which selfishness provides under capitalism are
removed, and a premium is put upon laziness and negligence. Whereas
in a capitalist society sclfishness incites everyone to the utmost diligence, in a socialist society it makes for inertia and laxity. The socialists
may still babble about the miraculous change in human nature that
the advent of socialism will effect, and about the substitution of lofty
altruism for mean egotism. But they must no longer indulge in fables
about the marvelous effects the selfishness of each individual will
bring about under socialism.ll
9 0 judicious man can fail to conclude from the evidence of these
considerations that in the market economy the productivity of labor
is incomparably higher than it would be under socialisn~.However,
this cognition does not settle the question between the advocates of
capitalism and those of socialism from a praxeological, i.e., scientific,
point of view.
A bona fide advocate of socialism who is free from bigotry, prepossession, and malice could still contend: "It may bc true that P, the
total net income turned out in a market society, is larger than p, the
total net income turned out in a socialist society. But if the socialist
system assigns to each of its members an equal share of p (vis,? = d),
Z

all those whose income in the market society is smaller than d are
favored by the substitution of socialism for capitalism. It may happen
that this group of people includes the majority of men. At any rate it
becomes evident that the doctrine of the harmony between the rightly
understood interests of all members of the market society is untenable.
There is a class of men whose interests are hurt by the very existence
of the market economy and who would be better off under socialism."
The liberals contest the conclusiveness of this reasoning. They believe
that p will lag so much behind P that d will be smallcr than the income
which even those earning the lowest wagcs get in the markct society.
There can be nc d~ub: :ha: the ol-,)ec:ion raised by the liberals is
well founded. However, their refutation of the socialist claims is not
based on praxeological considerations and therefore lacks the apodictic and incontestable argumentative power inherent in a praxeological
I I. The doctrine refuted in the text found its most brilliant expositor in John
Stuart Mill (Principles of Political Economy [People's ed. London, 18671, pp.
I 26 ff.). However, Mill resorted to this doctrine merely in order to refute an
objection raised against socialism, viz., that, by eliminating the incentive provided
by selfishness, it would impair the productivity of labor. H e was not so blind as
to assert that the productivity of labor would multiply under socialism. For an
analysis and refutation of Mill's reasoning, cf. Mises, Socialism, pp. 173-181.

Harmony and Conffict of Interests

67 5

demonstration. It is based on a judgment of relevance, the quantitative appraisal of the difference between the two magnitudes P and P.
I n the field of human action such quantitative cognition is obtained
b y understanding, with regard to which full agreerncnt between men
cannot be reached. Praxeology, economics, and catallactics are of
no use for the settlement of such dissensions concerning quantitative
issues.
The advocates of socialism could even go farther and say: "Granted
that each individual will be worse off under socialism than even the
poorest under capitalism. Yet we spurn the market economy in spite
of the fact that it supplies everybody with more goods than socialism.
W e disapprove of capitalism on ethical grounds as an unfair and
amoral system. W e prefer socialism on grounds commonly called noneconomic and pur up with the fact that it impairs cvcrybody's material
well-being."12 It cannot be denied that this haughty indifference
with regard to material wcll-being is a privilege reserved to ivorytower intellectuals, secluded from reality, and to ascetic anchorites.
W h a t made socialism popular with the immense majority of its supporters was, on the contrary-, the illusion that it would supply them
with more amenities than capitalism. But however this may be, it is
obvious that this type of prosocialist argumentation cannot be touched
by the liberal reasoning concerning the productivity of labor.
If no other objections could be raised to the socialist plans than
that socialism will lower the standard of living of all or at least of
the immensc majority, it would be impossible for praxeology to pronounce a final judgment. Men would have to decide the issue betwecn
capitalism and socialism on the ground of judgments of value and of
judgments of relevance. T h e y would have to choose between the
two systems as they choose between many other things. X o objective
standard could be discovered which would make it possible to settle
the dispute in a manner which allows no contradiction and must be
accepted by every sane individual. T h e freedom of each man's choice
and discretion would not be annihilated b y inexorable necessity.
Ilowever, the true state of affairs is entirely different. Man is not in
a position to choose between these two systems. Human cooperation
under the system of the social division of labor is possible only in the
1 2 . This mode of reasoning was ~nainlyresorted to by many eminent champions of Christian socialism. T h e ~Marxiansused to recommend socialism on the
ground that it would multiply productivity and bring unprecedented material
wealrh to everybody. Only lately have they changed their tactics. They declare
that rhe Russian worker is happier than the American worker in spite of the fact
that his standard of living is much lower; the knowledge that he lives under a
fair social system compensates by far for all his material hardships.

676

Human Action

market cconorny. Socialism is not a realizable system of society's
econonlic organization becausc it lacks any method of economic calculation. T o deal with this fundamental problem is the task of the
fifth part of this book.
The establishment of this truth does not amount to a deprcciation
of the conclusiveness and the convincing power of the antisocialist
argument derived from thc impairment of productivity to be expected
from socialism. The weight of this objection raised to the socialist
plans is so overwhelming that no judicious man could hesitate to
choose capitalism. Yet this would still be a choicc between alternative
systems of society's econon~icorganization, prcference given to one
system as against another. Howcver, such is not the alternative. Socialism cannot he realized becausc it is beyond human power to establish
it as a social system. The choice is between capitalism and chaos. A
man who chooses betwecn drinking a glass of milk and a glass of a
solution of potassium cyanide does not choosc between two beverages;
he chooses between life and death. A society that chooses betwecn
capitalism and socialism does not choosc betwecn two social systems; it
chooses between social cooperation and the disintegration of society.
Socialism is not an alternativc to capitalism; it is an alternativc to any
system under which men can live as lxw~anbeings. T o strcss this point
is the task of economics as it is the task of biology and chemistry to
teach that potassium cyanide is not a nutriment but a deadly poison.
The convincing power of the productivity argument is in fact so
irresistible that the advocates of socialisnl were forced to abandon
their oId tactics and to resort to new methods. They are eager to
divert attention from the productivity issue by throwing into relief
the monopoly problem. All contemporary socialist manifestoes expatiate on monopoly power. Statesmen and professors try to outdo
one another in depicting the evils of monopoly. Our age is called the
age of monopoly capitalism. The foremost argument advanced today
in favor of socialism is the refcrcnce to monopoly.
Xow, it is true that the emcrgence of monopoly priccs (not of
monopoly as such without monopoly prices) creates a discrepancy
bctwccn the interests of thc monopolist and thosc of the consumers.
The monopolist does not employ the monopolized good according
to thc wishes of the consumers. As far as there arc monopoly prices,
the interests of the monopolist takc precedence over those of the
public and the democracy of the market is restricted. With regard to
monopoly prices there is not harmony, but conflict of intercsts.
It is possible to contest these statcmcnts with regard to the monopoly
prices received in the sale of articles under patents and copyrights.

Harmony and Conflict of Interests
One may argue that in the absence of patent and copyright legislation
these books, compositions, and technological innovations would never
have comc into existence. T h e public pays monopoly prices for things
they would not have enjoyed at all under competitive prices. However, we may fairly disregard this issue. It has little to do with the
great monopoly controversy of our day. When peoplc deal with
the evils of &;lopo~y, they imply that there prevails within the unhampered market economy a general and inevitable tendency toward
the substitution of monopoly prices for competitive prices. This is,
they say, a characteristic mark of "mature" or "late" capitalism. Whatever conditions may have been in thc earlier stages of capitalist cvolution and whatever onc may think about the validity of the classical
economists' statements conccrning the harmony of the rightly understood interests, today therc is no longer any question of such ;I
harmony.
As has been pointed out already,13 thcre is no such tendency toward
rnonopolization. It is a fact that with many commodities in many
countries monopoly prices prcvail, and, moreover, many articles are
sold at monopoly prices on thc world market. However, almost all
of these instances of monopoly prices are the outgrowth of government interference with business. Thcy were not created by thc interplay of the factors operating on a free market. T h e y are not products
of capitalism, but precisely of the endeavors to countcract the forces
determining the height of the market prices. T t is a distortion of fact
to speak of monopoly capitalism. It would be more appropriate to
speak of monopoly interventionism or of monopoly statism.
Those instances of monopoly prices which would appear also on
a market not harnpercd and sabotaged by the interferencc of the
vario~~s
national governments and by conspiracies between groups
of governments are of minor imporrance. They concern some raw
1nateriaIs the deposits of which are few and geographically concentrated, and local limited-space monopolies. However, it is a fact that
in these cases rnonopoly prices can bc realized even in the absence of
government policies aiming directly or indirectly at their establishment. I t is necessary to realizc that consumers' sovereignty is not perfect and that there are limits t o the operation of the democratic process
of the market. There is, it is true, in some exceptionaI and rare cases
of minor importance even on a market not hampered and sabotaged
by government interference an antagonism between the interests of
the owners of factors of production and those of the rest of the people.
However, the existence of such antagonisms by no means impairs
13. Cf. above, p. 363.

Human Action
the concord of the interests of a11 people with regard to the preservation of the market economy. T h e market economy is the only system
of society's economic organization that can function and really has
been functioning. Socialism is unrealizable because of its inability
to develop a method for economic calculation. Interventionism must
result in a state of affairs which, from the point of view of its advocates, is less desirable than the conditions of the unhampered market
economy which it aims to alter. In addition, it liquidates itself as soon
as it is pushed beyond a narrow field of application.li Such being the
case, the only social order that can preserve and further intensify the
social division of labor is the market economy. All those who do
not wish to disintegrate social cooperation and to return to the
conditions of primitive barbarism are interested in the perpetuation
of the market economy.
T h e classical economists' teachings concerning the harmony of the
rightly understood interests were defective in so far as they failed
to recognize the fact that the democratic process of the market is
not perfect, because in some instances of minor importance, even in
the unhampered market economy, nlonopoly prices may appear. But
much more conspicuous was their failure to recognize that and why
no socialist system can be considered as a system of society's economic
organization. They based the doctrine of the harmony of interests
upon the erroneous assumption that there are no exceptions to the
rule that the owners of the means of production are forced b y the
market process to employ their property according to the wishes
of the consumers. Today this theorem must be based on the knowledge
that no economic calculation is feasible under socialism.

4. Private Property
Private ownership of the means of production is the fundamental
institution of the market economy. I t is the institution the presence of
which characterizes the market econonly as such. Where it is absent,
there is no question of a market economy.
Ownership means fuIl control of the services that can be derived
from a good. This catallactic notion of ownership and property rights
is not to be confused with the legal definition of ownership and property rights as stated in the laws of various countries. I t was the idea of
legislators and courts to define the legal concept of property in such
a way as to give to the proprietor full protection b y the governmental
apparatus of coercion and compulsion and to prevent anybody from
14. Cf. ;he sixth part of this book.

Harwiony and Conflict of Interests

679

encroaching upon his rights. As far as this purpose was adequately
realized, the legal concept of property rights corresponded to the
catallactic concept. However, nowadays there are tendencies to
abolish the institution of private property by a change in the laws
determining the scope of the actions which the proprietor is entitled to undertake with regard to the things which are his property.
While retaining the term private property, these reforrns aim at the
substitution of public ownership for private ownership. This tendency
is the characteristic mark of the plans of various schools of Christian
socialism and of nationalist socialism. But few of the champions of
these schools have been so keen as the R'azi philosopher Othmar Spann,
who explicitly declared that the realization of his plans would bring
about a state of affairs in which the institution of private property
will be preserved only in a "formal scnse, while in fact there will be
only public ownership." = T h e r eis need to mention thcse things in
order to avoid popular fallacies and confusion. In dealing with private
property, catallactics deals with control, not with IegaI terms, concepts and definitions. Private ownership means that the proprietors
determine the employment of the factors of production, while public
ownership means that the government controls their employment.
Private property is a human device. It is not sacred. It came into
existence in early ages of history, when people with their ow11 power
and by their own authority appropriated to themselves what had
previously not been anybody's propcrty. Again and again proprietors
were robbed of their property by expropriation. The history of
private property can be traced back to a point at which it origiiated
out of acts which were certainly not legal. Virtually every owner is the
direct or indirect legal successor of people who acquired ownership
either by arbitrary appropriation of ownerless things or by violent
spoliation of their predecessor.
However, the fact that legal formalism can trace back every title
either to arbitrary appropriation or to violent expropriation has no
significance whatever for the conditions of a markct society. Ownership in the market economy is no longer linked up with the remote
origin of private property. Those events in a far-distant past, hidden
in the darkness of primitive mankind's history, are no longer of any
concern for our day. For in an unhampered market society the consumers daily decide anew who should own and how much he should
own. The consumers allot control of the means of production to
those who know how to use them best for the satisfaction of the
most urgent wants of the consumers. Only in a legal and formalistic
15. Cf. Spann, Der wahre Staat (Leipzig, 1921), p. 249.

680

Human Action

sense can the owners be considered the successors of appropriators
and expropriators. In fact, they are mandataries of the consumers,
bound by the operation of the market to serve the consumers best.
Capitalism is the consummation of the self-determination of the consumers.
The meaning of private property in the market society is radically
different from what it is under a system of each household's autarky.
Where each househeld is economically seIf-sufficient, the privately
owned means of production exclusively serve the proprietor. He
alone reaps all the benefits derived from their employment. In the
market society the proprietors of capital and land can enjoy their
property only by employing it for the satisfaction of other people's
wants. They must serve the consumers in order to have any advantage
from what is their own. T h e very fact that they own means of
production forces them to submit to the wishes of the public. Ownership is an asset only for those who know how to employ it in the best
possible way for the benefit of the consumers. It is a social function.

5 . The Conflicts of Our Age
Popular opinion sees the source of the conflicts which bring about
the civil wars and international wars of our age in the collision of
"economic" interests inherent in the market economy. Civil war
is the rebellion of the "exploited" masses against the "exploiting"
classes. Foreign war is the revolt of the "have-not" nations against
those nations who have appropriated to themselves an unfair share
of the earth's natural resources and, with insatiable greed, want to
snatch even more of this wealth destined for the use of all. He who
in face of these facts speaks of the harmony of the rightly understood
interests, is either a moron or an infamous apologist of a manifestly
unjust social order. No intelligent and honest man could fail to realize
that there prevail today irreconcilable conflicts of material interests
which can be settied oniy by recourse to arms.
It is certainly true that our age is full of conflicts which generate
war. However, these conflicts do not spring from the operation of
the unhampered market society. It may be permissible to call them
economic conflicts because they concern that sphere of human life
which is, in common speech, known as the sphere of economic activities. But it is a serious blunder to infer from this appellation that the
source of these conflicts are conditions which develop within the
frame of a market society. It is not capitalism that produces them,
but precisely the anticapitalistic policies designed to check the func-

Harnzony and Coriflict of Interests

68 I

tioning of capitalism. They are an outgrowth of the various governments' interference with business, of trade and migration barriers
and discrimination against foreign labor, forcign products, and
foreign capital.
None of these conflicts could have emerged in an unhampered
rnarket economy. Imagine a world in which everybody were free
to live and work as entrcpreneur or as employee where he wanted
and how he chose, and ask which of these conflicts could still exist.
Irnagine a world in which the principle of private ownership of the
means of production is fully realized, in which there are no institutions hindering the mobility of capital, labor, and commodities. in
which the laws, the courts, and thc adrninistrativc officers do not dihcriminate against any individual or group of individuals, whether
native or alien. Imagine a state of affairs in which governments are
devoted exclusively to thc task of protecting the individual's life,
health, and property against violent and fraudulent aggression. In
such a world the frontiers are drawn on the maps, but they do not
hinder anybody from the pursuit of what he thinks wiI1 make him
more prosperous. No individual is interested in the expansion of the
size of his nation's territory, as he cannot derive any gain from such
an aggrandizement. Conquest docs not pay and war becomes obsolete.
In the ages preceding the rise of libcralism and the evolution of
modern capitalism, people for the most part consumed only what
could be produced out of raw matcrials available in their own neighborhood. The development of the international division of labor has
radically altered this state of affairs. Food and raw materials imported
from distant countries are articles of mass consumption. The most
advanced European nations could do without these imports only at
the price of a very considcratde lowering of their standard of living.
They must pay fbr the badly needed purchase of minerals, lumber,
oil, cereals, fat, coffce, tea, cocoa, fruit, wool, and cotton by cxporting manufactures, most of them processed out of imported raw
materials. Their vital interests are hurt by the protectionist trade policies of the countries producing these primary products.
T w o hundred years ago it was of little concern to the Swedes or
the Swiss whether or not a non-European country was efficient in
utilizing its natural rcsourccs. But today economic backwardness in
a foreign country, endowed by rich natural resources, hurts the interests of all those w-hose standard of living could be raised if a more
appropriate mode of utilizing this natural wealth were adopted. The
principle of each nation's unrestricted sovereignty is irz a world of
government interference with business a challenge ;o all other nations.

682

Human Action

Thc conflict between the have-nots and the haves is a real conflict.
But it is present onIy in a world in which any sovereign government
is free 60 hurt the interests of all peoples-its own included-by depriving the consumers of the advantages a better exploitation of this
country's resources would give them. It is not sovereignty as such
that makes for war, but sovereignty of governments not entirely committed to the principles of the marker economy.
Liberalism did not and does not build its hopes upon abolition of the
sovereignty of the various national governments, a vcnture which
would result in endless wars. It aims at a general recognition of the
idea of economic frcedom. If all peoples become liberal and conceive
that economic frccdom best serves their own interests, national sovereignty will no longer engender conflict and war. What is needed to
make peace durable is neither international treaties and covenants nor
international tribunals and organizations like thc defunct League of
Nations or its successor, the United Nations. If the principle of the
markct cconomy is universally accepted, such makeshifts arc unnecessary; if it is not accepted, they are futile. Durable peace can
only be the outgrouth of a change in ideologies. As long as the
peoples cling to the Montaigne dogma and think that they cannot
prosper economically except at the expense of other nations, peace
will ncver be anything other than a period of preparation for the next
war.
Economic nationalism is incompatible with durable peace. Yet
economic nationalism is unavoidable where there is government interference with business. Protectionism is indispensable where there
is no domestic free trade., Where there is governmcnt interference
with business, free trade even in the short run would frustrate thc
aims sought by the various interventionist measures.16
It is an illusion to believe that a nation would lastingly tolerate
other nations' policies which harm the vital interest of its own citizens. Let us assume that the United Nations had been established in
the year 1600 and that the Indian tribes of hTorthAmerica had been
admitted as mcrnbers of this organization. Then the sovereignty of
these Indians would have been recognized as inviolable. They would
have been given the right to exclude all aliens from entering thcir
territory and from exploiting its rich natural resources which they
thcmselvcs did not know how to utilize. Does anybody rcally believe
that any international covenant or charter could have prevented the
Europeans from invading these countries?
16.Cf. above, pp. 363-365, and below, pp. 819--821.

Harmony and Conflict of Interests

683

Many of the richest deposits of various mineral substances are located in areas whose inhabitants are too ignorant, too inert, or too
dull to take advantage of the riches nature has bestowed upon them.
If the governmcnts of these countries prevent aliens from exploiting
these deposits, or if their conduct of public affairs is so arbitrary that
no foreign investments are safe, serious harm is inflicted upon all those
foreign peoples whose material well-being could be improved by a
more adequate utilization of the deposits concerned. It does not matter
whether the policies of these governments are the outcome of a
general cultural backwardness or of the adoption of the now fashionable ideas of interventionism and economic nationalism. The result is
the same in both cases.
There is no use in conjuring away these conflicts by wishful thinking. What is needed to make peace durable is a change in ideologies.
What generates war is the economic philosophy almost universally
espoused today by governments and political parties. As this philosophy sees it, there prevail within the unhampered market economy
irreconciIable conflicts between the interests of various nztions. Free
trade harms a nation; it brings about impoverishment. I t is the duty
of government to prevent the evils of free trade by trade barriers.
W e may, for the sake of argument, disregard the fact that protectionism also hurts the interests of the nations which resort to it. But
there can be no doubt that protectionism aims at damaging the interests
of foreign peoples and really does damage them. It is an illusion to
assume that those injured will tolerate other nations' protectionism
if they believe that they are strong enough to brush it away by the
use of arms. The philosophy of protectionism is a philosophy of war.
T h e wars of our age are not at variance with popular economic
doctrines; they are, on the contrary, the inescapable result of a consistent application of these doctrines.
T h e League of Nations did not fail because its organization was
deficient. It failed because it lacked the spirit of genuine liberalism.
It was a convention of governmcnts imbued with the spirit of economic nationalism and entirely committed to the principles of economic warfare. While the delegates indulged in mere academic talk
about good will among the nations, the governments whom they
represented inflicted a good deal of evil upon all other nations. The
two decades of the League's functioning were marked by each nation's
adamant economic warfare against all other nations. The tariff protectionism of the years before 1914was mild indeed when compared
with what developed in the 'twenties and 'thirties-viz., embargoes,

Human Action
quantitative trade control, foreign exchange control, monetary devaluation, and so on.17
The prospects for the United hlations are not better, but rather
worse. Every nation looks upon imports, especially upon imports
of manufactured goods, as upon a disaster. It is the avowed goal of
almost all countries to bar foreign manufactures as much as possible
from access to their domestic markets. Almost all nations are fighting
against the specter of an unfavorable balance of trade. They do not
want to cooperate; they want to protect themselves against the alleged
dangers of cooperation.
17. For an a praisal of the abortive attempts of the League to do away with
economic war are, cf. Rappard, Le Nationalisme e'conomique et la Sociite' des
Nations (Paris, I 938).

f

Part Five

Social Cooperation Without n Market
XXV. THE IMAGINARY COSSTRUCTION
OF A SOCIALIST SOCIETY
I.

T h e Historical Origin of the Socialist Idea

$ N the social philosophers of the eightcenth ccntury laid the

of praxeology and cconornics, they were conW
"foundationsalmost
rontcd with
universally accepted and uncontested distinc-

f
an
tion between the petty sclfish individuals and the state, the representative of the interests df the wholc society. Howcver, at that tirne the
deification process which finally eIcvated thc men managing the social
apparatus of coercion and compulsion into thc ranks of the gods was
not yet complcted. What people had in mind when speaking of
government was not yet thc quasi-theological notion of an ornnipotent and omniscient deity, the pcrfect embodiment of all virtues; it
was thc concrcte governments ns they acted on the political scene. It
was the various sovereign entities whose territorial size was the outcome of bloody wars, diplomatic intrigues, and dynastic intermarriage and succession. It was the princes whose prjvate domain and
rcveilue were in many countries not yet separated from the public
treasury, and oligarchic republics, like Venice and some of the Swiss
cantons, in which the ultimate objective of the conduct of public
affairs was to enrich the ruIing aristocracy. The interests of these
rulers were in opposition to thosc of their "selfish" subjects cxclusivelv
committed to the pursuit of their own happiness on the one han&
and to those of foreign govcrnrnents longing for booty and territorial
aggrandizement on the other hand. In deaiing with thew antagonisms,
the authors of books on public affairs wcre ready to espouse the cause
of their own country's government. They assumed quitc candidly
that the rulcrs are the champions of the intercsts of the whole society,
irreconcilably conflicting with thosc of the individuals. In checking
the selfishness of their subjects, governrncnts were promoting the
wclfare of the whole of socicty as against the mean conccrns of
individuals.
The liberal philosophy discarded these notions. From its point of
view there are within the unharnpcred market societv no conflicts of
the rightly understood interests. The intcrests of the citizens are not

686

Human Action

opposed to those of the nation, the interests of each nation are not
opposed to those of other nations.
Yet in demonstrating this thesis the liberal philosophers themselves contributed an essential element to the notion of the godlike
state. They substituted in their inquiries the image of an ideal state
for the real states of their age. They constructed the vague image of
a government whose only objective is to make its citizens happy.
This ideal had certainly no counterpart in the Europe of the ancien
rkgime. In this Europe there were German princelings who sold their
subjects like cattle to fight the wars of foreign nations; thcre were
kings who seized every opportunity ,to rush upon weaker neighbors;
there was the shocking experience of the partitions of Poland; there
was France successively governed by the century's most profligate
men, the Regent OrlCans and Louis XV; and there was Spain, ruled by
the ill-bred paramour of an adulterous queen. However, the liberal
philosophers deal only with a state which has nothing in common
with these governments of corrupt courts and aristocracies. The state,
as it appears in their writings, is governed by a perfect superhuman
being, a king whose only aim is to promote the welfare of his subjects.
Starting from this assumption, they raise the question of whether the
actions of the individual citizens when left free from any authoritarian
~ o n t r o lwould not develop along lines of which this good and wise
king would disapprove. T h e liberal philosopher answers this question
in the negative. It is true, he admits, that the entrepreneurs are selfish
and seek their own profit. However, in the market economy they can
earn profits only by satisfying in the best possible way the most
urgent needs of the consumers. The objectives of entrepreneurship
do not differ from those of the perfect king. For this benevolent
king too aims at nothing else than such an employment of the means
of production that the maximum of consumer satisfaction can be
reached.
It is obvious that this reasoning introduces value judgments and
political bias into rhe rrearment of the probiems. This paternai ruicr
is merely an alias for the economist who by means of this trick elevates
his persona1 value judgments to the dignity of a universally valid
standard of absolute eternal values. The author identifies himself with
the perfect king and calls the ends he himself would choose if he
were equipped with this king's power, welfare, commonweal, and
volkswirtschaftliche productivity as distinct from the ends toward
which the selfish individuals are striving. He is so nai've as not to see
that this hypothetical chief of state is merely a hypostatization of his
own arbitrary vaIue judgments, and blithely assumes that he has dis-

A Socialist Society

687

covered an incontestable standard of good and evil. Masked as the
benevolent paternal autocrat, the author's own Ego is enshrined as
the voice of the absolute moral law.
T h e essential characteristic of the imaginary construction of this
king's ideal regime is that all its citizens are unconditionally subject
t o authoritarian control. T h e king issues orders and all obey. This
is not a market economy; there is no longer private ownership of the
mcans of production. T h e terminology of the ~narkcteconomy is
retained, but in fact there is no longer any private ownership of the
means of production, no real buying and selling, and no market prices.
Production is not directed by the conduct of the consumers displayed
on the market, but by authoritarian decrees. T h e authority assigns to
everybody his station in the system of the social division of labor,
determines what should be produced, and how and what each individual is aIlowed to consume. This is what nowadays can properly be
called the German variety of socialist management.l
Now, the economists compare this hypothetical system, which in
their eyes embodies the moral law itself, with the market economy.
T h e best they can say of the market economy is that it does not
bring about a state of affairs differcnt from that prodnced by the
supremacy of the perfect autocrat. They approve of the market
economy only because its operation, as they see it, ultimately attains
the same results the pcrfcct king would aim at. Thus the simplc identification of what is morally good and econo~nicallyexpedient with the
plans of the totalitarian dictator that characterizes all champions of
planning and socialism was not contested by many of the old liberals.
One must even assert that they originated this confusion when they
substituted the ideal image of the perfect state for the wicked and
unscrupulous despots and politicians of the real world. Of course,
for the liberal thinker this perfect state was merely an auxiliary tool
of reasoning, a model with which he compared the operation of the
market economy. But it was not ama~ingthat people finally raised
the question as TO why one shouid nor: transfer this ideai state from
the realm of thought into the realm of reality.
All older social reformers wanted to realize the good society by
a confiscation of a11 private property and its subsequent redistribution;
each man's share should be equal to that of every other, and continuous
vigilance by the authorities should safeguard the preservation of this
equalitarian system. These plans became unrealizable when the largescale enterprises in manufacturing, mining, and transportation appeared. There cannot be any question of splitting up large-scale busiI.

Cf. below, pp. 713-714.

688

Human Action

ness units and distributing the fragments in equal shares.? T h e age-old
program of redistribution was superseded b y the idea of socialization.
T h e means of production were to be expropriated, but no redistribution was to be resorted to. T h e state itself was to run all the plants
and farms.
This inference became logically inescapable as soon as people began
to ascribe to the state not only moral but also intellectual perfection.
T h e liberal philosophers had described their imaginary state as an
unselfish entity, exclusively committed to the best possible improvement of its subjects' welfare. T h e y had discovered that in the frame
of a market society the citizens' selfishness must bring about the sanic
results that this unselfish state would seek to realize; it was precisely
this fact that justified the preservation of the market economy in
their eyes. But things became different as soon as people began to
ascribe to the state not only the best intentions but also omniscience.
T h e n one could not help concluding that the infallible state as in
a position to succeed in the conduct of production activities better
than erring individuals. I t would avoid all those errors that often
frustrate the actions of entrepreneurs and capitalists. There woiild no
longer be maIinvestnient o r squandering of scarce factors of production; wealth would multiply. T h e "anarchy" of production appears
wasteful when contrasted with the planning of the omniscient state.
T h e socialist mode of production then appears t o be the only reasonable system, and the market economy seems the incarnation of unreason. In the eyes of the rationalist advocates of socialism, the marltct
economy is simply an incomprehensible aberration of mankind. In
the eyes of those influenced b y historicism, the market economy is
the social order of an inferior stage of human evolution which the
inescapable process of progressive perfection wiIl eliminate in order
to establish the more adequate system of socialism. Both lines of
thought agree that reason itself postulates the transition t o socialism.
W h a t the na'ive mind calls reason is nothing but the absolutization
of its own value judgments. T h e individual simpIy identifies the products of his own reasoning with the shaky notion of an absolute reason.
S o socialist ever gave a thought to the possibility that the abstract
entity which he wants to vest with unlimited power-whether it is
called humanity, society, nation, state, or government-could act in
a way of which he himself disapproves. A socialist advocates socialism
because he is fully convinced that the supreme director of the socialist
commonwealth will be reasonable from his-the individual socialist's
2. There are, however, even today in the United States people who want to
knock to pieces large-scale production and to do away with corporate business.

A Socialist Society

689

-point of view, that he will aim at those ends of which he-the individual socialist-fully approves, and that he will try to attain these
ends by choosing means which he-the individual socialist-would
also choose. Every socialist calls only that system a genuinely socialist
system in which these conditions are completely fulfilled; all other
brands claiming the name of socialism are counterfeit systems cntirely
different from true socialism. Every socialist is a disguised dictator.
Woe to all dissentcrs! They have forfeited their right to live and
must be "liquidated."
The market economy makes peaceful cooperation among people
possible in spite of the fact that they disagree with regard to their
value judgments. In the plans of the socialists there is no room left
for dissenting views. Their principle is Gleichschaltu7tg, perfect uniformity enforced by the police.
People frequently call socialism a religion. It is indccd the religion
of self-deification. The State and Government of which the planners
speak, the People of the nationalists, the Society of the Marxians and
the Humanity of the positivists are names for the God of the new
religions. But all these idols are merely aliases for the individual rcformer's own will. In ascribing to his idol all those attributes which the
theologians ascribe to God, the inflated Ego glorifies itsclf. It is infinitely good, omnipotent, on~nipresent,omniscient, eternal. It is the
only perfect being in this imperfect world.
Economics is not called to examine blind faith and bigotry. The
faithful are proof against every criticism. In their eyes criticism is
scandalous, a blasphemous revolt of wicked men against the imperishable splendor of their jdoI. Economics deals merely with the socialist
plans, not with the psychological factors that impel people to espouse
the religion of statolatry.
2.

T h e Socialist Doctrine

Karl Marx was not the originator of socialism. The idca of socialism
was fully elaborated when Marx adopted the socialist creed. Nothing
could be added to the praxeological description of the sociaIist system
as developed by his predecessors, and Marx did not add anything.
Neither did Marx refute the objections against the feasibility, dcsirability, and advantageousness of socialisn~raised by earlier authors
and by his contemporaries. He never even embarked upon such a
venture, fully aware as he was of his inability to succeed :in it. All that
he did to fight the criticisms of socialism was to hatch out the doctrine
of polylogism.

690
Human Action
However, the services that Marx rendered t o the socialist propaganda were not confincd to the invention of polylogism. Still more
important was his doctrine of the inevitability of socialism.
Marx lived in an age in which the doctrine of evolutionary meliorism was almost generally accepted. The invisible hand of Providence
leads men, independently of their wills, from lower and Iess perfect
stages to higher and more perfect ones. There prevails in the course
of human history an inevitable tendency toward progress and improvement. Each later stage of human affairs is, by virtue of its being
a later stage, also a higher and better stage. Nothing is permanent in
human conditions except this irresistible urge toward progress. Hegel,
who died a few years before Marx entered the scene, had presented
this doctrine in his fascinating philosophy of history, and Nietzsche,
who entered the scene just at the time when Marx withdrew, made
it the focal point of his no less fascinating writings. It has been the
myth of the last two hundred years.
What Marx did was to integrate the socialist creed into this meliorist doctrine. T h e coming of sociaIism is inevitable, and this by itself
proves that socialism is a higher and more perfect state of human
affairs than the preceding state of capitalism. It is vain to discuss the
pros and cons of socialism. Socialism is bound to come "with the
inexorability of a law of nature." Only morons can be so stupid as
to question whether what is bound to come is more beneficial than
what preceded it. Only bribed apologists of the unjust claims of the
exploiters can be so insolent as to find any fault with socialism.
If w e attribute the epithet Marxian to all those who agree with
this doctrine, we must call the immense majority of our contemporaries Marxians. These peopIe agree that the coming of socialism is
both absolutely inevitable and highly desirable. T h e "wave of the
future" drives mankind toward socialism. Of course, they disagree
with one another as to who is to bc entrusted with the captaincy of
the socialist ship of state. There are many candidates for this job.
Marx tried to prove his prophecy in a twofold way. T h e first is
the method of Hegelian dialectics. Capitalist private property is the
first negation of individual private property and must beget its own
negation, viz., the establishment of public property in the means of
production.* Things were as simple as that for the hosts of Hegelian
writers who infested Germany in the days of Marx.
T h e second method is the demonstration of the unsatisfactory conditions brought about by capitalism. Marx's critique of the capitalist
3. Cf. Marx, Das Kapital (7th ed. Hamburg, 1914), I, 728.
4. lbid.

A Socialist Society

691

mode of production is entirely wrong. Even the most orthodox
Marxians are not bold enough to support seriously its essential thesis,
namely, that capitalism results in a progressive impoverishment of
the wage earners. But if one admits for the sake of argument all the
absurdities of the Marxian analysis of capitalism, nothing is yet won
for the demonstration of the two theses, viz., that socialism is
bound to come and that it is not only a better system than capitalism,
but even the most perfect system, the final realization of which will
bring to man eternal bliss in his earthly life. All the sophisticated
syllogisms of the ponderous volumes published by Marx, Engels, and
hundreds of Marxian authors cannot conceal the fact that the only
and ultimate source of Marx7sprophecy is an alleged inspiration by
virtue of which Marx claims to have guessed the plans of the mysterious powers determining the course of history. Like Hegel, Marx was
a prophet communicating to the people the revelation that an inner
voice had imparted to him.
The outstanding fact in the history of socialism between 1848 and
1920 was that the essential problems concerning its working were
hardly ever touched upon. The Marxian taboo branded all attempts
to examine the economic problems of a socialist commonwealth as
"unscientific." Nobody was bold enough to defy this ban. It was
tacitly assumed by both the friends and the foes of sociaIism that
socialism is a realizable system of mankind's cconornic organization.
The vast literature concerning socialism dealt with alleged shortcomings of capitalism and with the general cultural implications of socialism. It never dealt with the economics of socialism as such.
The socialist creed rests upon t h e e dogmas:
First: Society is an omnipotent and omniscient being, free from
human frailty and weakness.
Second: The coming of socialism is inevitable.
Third: As history is a continuous progress from less perfect conditions to more perfect conditions, the coming of socialism is desirable.
For praxeology and economics the only problem to be discussed
in regard to socialism is this: Can a socialist system operate as a system
of the division of labor?

3. T h e Praxeological Character of Socialism
The essential mark of socialism is that one will alone acts. It is
immaterial whose wiIl it is. The director may be an anointed king
or a dictator, ruling by virtue of his chnrisvza, he may be a Fiihrer or
a board of Fiihrers appointed by the vote of the people. T h e main

692

Human Action

thing is that the employment of all factors of production is directed
by one agency only. One will alone chooses, decides, directs, acts,
gives orders. All the rest simply obey orders and instructions. Organization and a planned order are substituted for the "anarchy"
of production and for various people's initiative. Social cooperation under the division of labor is safeguarded by a system of
hegemonic bonds in which a director peremptorily calls upon
the obedience of all his wards.
In terming the director society (as the Marxians do), state (with
a capital S), government, or authority, pcople tend to forget that
the director is always a human being, not an abstract notion or a
mythical collective entity. W e may admit that the director or the
board of directors are people of superior ability, wise and full of
good intentions. But it would be nothing short of idiocy to assume that
they are omniscient and infallible.
In a praxeological analysis of the problems of socialism, we are not
concerned with the moral and ethical character of the director.
Neither do we discuss his value judgments and his choice of ultimate
ends. What we are dealing with is merely the question of whether
any mortal man, equipped with the logical structure of the human
mind, can be equal to the tasks incumbent upon a director of a socialist
society.
W e assume that the director has at his disposal all the technological
knowledge of his age. Moreover, hc has a complete inventorv of a11
the material factors of production available and a roster enu&erating
all manpower employable. In these respects the crowd of experts and
specialists which he assembles in his offices provide him with perfect
information and answer correctly all questions he may ask them.
Their voluminous reports accumulate in huge piles on his desk. But
now he must act. H e must choose among an infinite variety of projects
in such a way that no want which he hiinself considers more urgent
remains unsatisfied because the factors of production required for its
satisfaction are employed for the satisfaction of wants which he considers less urgent.
I t is important to realize that this problem has nothing at all to do
with the valuation of the ultimate ends. It refers only to the means
by the employlnent of which the ultimate ends chosen are to be
attained. W e assume that the director has made up his mind with regard to the valuation of ultimate ends. W e do not question his decision.
Neither do we raise the question of whether the people, the wards,
approve or disapprove of their director's decisions. Wc may assume,
for the sake of argument, that a mysterious power makes kveryone

'4 Socialist Society

69 3

agree with one another and with the director in the valuation of
ultimate ends.
Our problem, the crucial and only problem of socialism, is a purely
economic problem, and as such refers merely to means and not to
ultimate ends.

XXVI. T H E IMPOSSIBILITY OF ECONOXiIIC
CALCULATION UNDER SOCIALISM
I.

T h e Problem

HE director wants to build a house. Now, there are many methods

T

that can be resorted to. Each of them offers, from the point
of view of the director, certain advantages and disadvantages with
regard to the utilization of the future building, and results in a diffcrent duration of the building's serviceableness; each of them requires
other expenditures of building materials and labor and absorbs other
periods of production. Which method should the director choose;
H e cannot reduce to a common deno~ninatorthe items of various
materials and various kinds of labor to be expended. Therefore he
cannot compare them. Hc cannot attach either to the waiting time
(period of production) or to the duration of serviceableness a definite
numerical expression. In short, he cannot, in comparing costs to be
expended and gains to be earned, resort to any arithmetical operation.
The plans of his architects enumerate a vast multiplicity of various
items in kind; they refer to the physical and chemical qualities of
various materials and to the physical productivity of various machines,
tools, and procedures. But all their statements remain unrelated to
each other. There is no means of establishing any connection between
them.
Imagine the plight of the director when faced with a project. What
he needs to know is whether or not the execution of the project will
increase well-being, that is, add something to the wealth available
without impairing the satisfaction of wants which he considers more
urgent. But none of the reports he receives give him any clue to the
solution of this problem.
W e may for the sake of argument at first disregard the dilemmas
involved in the choice of consumers' goods to be produced. W e may
assume that this problem is settled. But there is the embarrassing
multitude of producers' goods and the infinite variety of procedures
that can be resorted to for manufacturing definite consumers' goods.
The most advantageous location of each industry and the optimum
size of each plant and of each piece of equipment must be determined.

Economic Calculation under Socialism

695

Olle must determine what kind of mechanical power should be employed in each of them, and which of the various formulas for the
production of this energy should be applied. All these problems are
raised daily in thousands and thousands of cases. Each case offers
special conditions and requires an individual solution appropriate to
these special data. The number of elements with which the director's
decision has to deal is much greater than would be indicated by a
merely technological description of the available producers' goods
in terms of physics and chemistry. The Iocation of each of them must
be taken into consideration as well as the serviceableness of the
capital investments made in the past for their utilization. The director
does not simply have to deal with coal as such, but with thousands
and thousands of pits already in operation in various places, and with
the possibilities for digging new pits, with the various methods of
mining in each of them, with the different qualities of the coal in
various deposits, with the various methods for utilizing the coal for
the production of heat, power, and a great number of derivatives.
I t is permissible to say that the present state of technological knowledge makes it possible to produce almost anything out of almosr everything. Our ancestors, for instance, knew only a limited number of
employments for wood. Modern technology has added a multitude
of possible new employments. Wood can be used for the production
of paper, of various textiie fibers, of foodstuffs, drugs, and many
other synthetic products.
~oday
two methods are resorted to for providing a city with clean
water. Either one brings the water over long distances in aqueducts,
an ancient method long practiced, or one chemically purifies the
water avaiIable in the city's neighborhood. W h y does one not produce
water synthetically in factories? Modern technology could easily
solve the technological problems involved. The average man in his
mental inertia is ready to ridicule such projects as sheer lunacy. However, thc only reason why the synthetic production of drinking water
today-perhaps not at a later day-is out of the question is that
economic calculation in terms of money shows that it is a more
expensive procedure than other methods. Eliminate economic calculation and you have no means of making a rational choice between the
various alternatives.
The socialists, it is true, object that economic calculation is not
infallible. They say that the capitalists sometimes make mistakes in
their calculation. Of course, this happens and will always happen.
For all human action points to the future and the future is always
uncertain. The most carefuIly elaborated plans are frustrated if ex-

696

Human Action

pectations concerning the futurc are dashed to the ground. However,
this is quite a different problem. Today we calculate from the point
of view of our present knowledge and of our present anticipation
of future conditions. W e do not deal with the problcm of whether
or not the director will be able to anticipate futurc conditions. What
we have in mind is that the director cannot calculate from the point of
view of his own present value judgments and his own present anticipations of futurc conditions, whatever they may be. If he invests today
in the canning industry, it may happen that a change in consumers'
tastes or in the hygienic opinions concerning the wholesomeness of
canned food will one day turn his investment into a malinvestment.
Hut how can he find out today how to build and equip a cannery
most economically?
Some raiIroad lines constructed at the turn of the century would not
have been built if people had at that time anticipated the impending
advance of motoring and aviation. But those who at that time built
railroads knew which of the various possible alternatives for the
realization of their plans they had to choose fro111the point of view
of their appraisements and anticipations and of the market prices of
their day in which the valuations of the consumers were reflected.
It is precisely this insight that the director will lack. He will be
like a sailor on the high seas unfamiliar with the methods of navigation,
or like a medieval scholar entrusted with the technical operation of a
railroad engine.
W e have assumed that the director has already made up his mind
with regard to the construction of a definite plant or building. HoM.ever, in order to male such a decision he already needs econonlic
calculation. If a hydroelectric power station is to be built, one must
know whether or not this is the most economical way to produce the
energy needed. How can he know this if he cannot calculate costs and
output?
W e may admit that in its initial period a socialist regime couId to
some extent rely upon the experience of the preceding age of capitalism. But what is to be done later, as conditions change more and morc?
Of what use could the prices of 1900 be for the director in 19+9?
And what use can the director in 1980 derive from the knowledge of
the prices of I 949?
The paradox of "planning" is that it cannot plan, because of the
absence of economic calculation. What is called a planned economy
is no economy at all. I t is just a system of groping about in the dark.
There is no question of a rational choice of means for the best possible

Econolnic Calculation under Socialism
attainment of the ultimate ends sought. What is called conscious
planning is precisely the elimination of conscious purposive action.
2.

Past Failures t o Conceive the Problem

For more than a hundred years the substitution of socialist planning
f o r private enterprise has been the main politicaI issue. Thousands
and thousands of books have been published for and against the communist plans. N o other subject has been more eagerly discussed in
private circles, in the press, in public gatherings, in the meetings of
learned societies, in election campaigns, and in parliaments. Wars have
been fought and rivers of blood have been shed for the cause of
socialism. Yet in all these years the essential question has not been
raised.
I t is true that some eminent economists-Hermann Heinrich Cossen, Albcrt Schaffle, Vilfredo Pareto, Nkolaas G. Pierson, Enrico
Barone-touched upon the problem. But, with the exception of
Pierson, they did not penetrate t o the core of the problem, and they
all failed t o recognize its primordial importance. Neither did they
venture to integrate it into the system of the theory of human action.
I t was these failures which prevented peoplc from paying attention
t o their observations. They were disregarded and soon fell into
oblivion.
I t would be a serious mistake t o blame the E3istorical School and
Institutionalism for this neglect of mankind's most vital problem.
These t w o lines of thought fanatically disparage economics, the
"dismal science," in the interests of their interventionist or socialist
propaganda. However, they have not succeeded in suppressing the
study of economics entirely. T h e puzzling thing is not why the detractors of economics failed to recognize the problem, but why the
economists were guilty of the same fault.
It is the two fundamental errors of mathematical economics that

----* L- :-J:-*-J
IIIU3L UC JIIUILLCU.

T h e mathematical economists are almost exclusively intent upon
the study of what they call economic equilibrium and the static state.
Recourse to the imaginary construction of an evenly rotating
economy is, as has been pointed out,l an indispensable mental tool
of economic reasoning. But i t is a grave mistake t o consider this
auxiliary tool as anything else than an imaginary construction, and to
overlook the fact that it has not only no counterpart in reality, but
I . Cf. above, pp. 247-251.

598
Human Action
cannot even be thought through consistently to its ultimate logical
consequences. The mathematical economist, blinded by the prepossession that economics must be constructed according to the pattern
of Newtonian mechanics and is open to treatment by mathernatica1
methods, misconstrues entirely the subject matter of his investigations.
He no longer deals with human action but with a soulless tnechanisn~
mysteriously actuated by forces not open to further analysis. In the
imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy there is, of
course, no room for the entrepreneurial function. Thus the mathematical economist eliminates the entrepreneur from his thought. H e
has no need for this mover and shaker whose never ceasing intervention prevents the imaginary system from reaching the state of perfect
equilibrium and static conditions. H e hates the entrepreneur as a
disturbing element. T h e ~ r i c e sof the factors of production, as the
mathematical economist sees it, are determined by thc intersection of
two curves, not by human action.
Moreover, in drawing his cherished curves of cost and price, the
mathematical economist fails to see that the reduction of costs and
prices to homogeneous magnitudes implies the use of a common
medium of exchange. Thus he creates the illusion that calculation
of costs and prices could be resorted to even in the absencc of a common denominator of the exchange ratios of the factors of production.
T h e result is that from the writings of the mathematical economists
the imaginary construction of a socialist commonu~ealth emerges
as a realizable system of cooperation under the division of labor,
as a fuI1-fledged alternative to the economic system based on private
control of the means of production. The director of the sociaIist
community will be in a position to allocate the various factors of
production in a rational way, i.e., on the ground of calculation. Men
can have both socialist cooperation under the division of labor and
rational employment of the factors of production. They are free to
adopt socialism without abandoning economy in the choice of means.
Socialism does not enjoin the renunciation of rationality in the employment of the factors of production. I t is a variety of rational social
action.
An apparent verification of these errors was seen in the experience
of the socialist governments of Soviet Russia and Nazi Germany.
People did not realize that these were not isolated socialist systems.
They were operating in an environment in which the price system
still worked. They could resort to economic calculation on the ground
of the prices established abroad. Without the aid of these prices their
actions would have been aimless and planless. Only because they were

Economic Calculation under Socialism

699

able to refer to these foreign prices wcre they abIe t o calculate, to
keep books, and to prepare their much talked about plans.

3 . Recent Suggestions f o r Socialist Economic Calculation
T h e socialist tracts deal with everything except the essential and
unique problem of socialism, viz., ceonornic calculation. It is only
in the last years that socialist writers have no longer been able to avoid
paying attention to this primordial matter. They have begun to suspect
that the Marxian technique of smearing "bourgeois" econo~nicsis
not an entirely sufficient method for the realization of the socialist
utopia. They have tried to substitute a theory of socialism for the
scurrilous Hegelian metaphysics of the Marxian doctrine. T h e y have
embarked upon designing schemes for socialist economic calculation.
Of course, they have lamentably failed in this task. I t would hardly be
necessary to deal with their spurious suggestions wcre it not for the
fact that such examination offers a good opportunity to bring into
relief fundamental features both of the market society and of the
imaginary construction of a nonmarket society.
The various schemes proposed can be classified in the following
way:
I. Calculation in kind is to be substituted for calculation in terms
of moncy. This method is worthless. One cannot add or subtract
numbers of different kinds (hctcrogeneous quantities) ."
2. Starting from the ideas of the labor theory of valuc the laborhour is recommended as the unit of calculation.- his suggcstion does
not take into account the original material factors of production and
ignores the diffcrent qualities of work accomplished in thc various
labor-hours worked by the same and by different people.
3. T h c unit is to be a "quantity" of utiIity. However, acting man
does not measure utility. H e arranges it in scales of gradation. Market
prices are not expressive of equivalence, but of a divergence in the
no+.rr.-. "f +L
L,I
..L,LI~I..~-:J--J ~ M ~
p ~ i oIt. is inlperr~~issii)ie
TO negiecc
the fundamental theorem of modern economics, namely, that the value
attached to onc unit of a supply of n-2 units is greater than that attached to one unit of a supply of n units.
T,nLL!UaL;VII
v

,
?

Ltlb C
hrln
+Y"

z. It would hardly be worth while even to mention this suggestion if it were
nor the solution that emanated from the very busy and obtrusive circlc of the
"logicd positivists" who flagrantly advertise their program of the "unity of
science." Cf. the writings of the late chief organizer of this group, Otto Neurath,
who in 1919acted as the hcad of the socialization bureau of the short-lived Soviet
republic of Munich, especially his Durch die Kriegswirtschaft zur Nnturalwirts c b ~ f t(Munich, 1919).pp. 2 16ff. Cf. also C . Landauer, Plirnwirtschaft und Verkek~swi~tschnf
t (Munich and Leipzig, 193I ) . p. 12 z.

j 00

Human Action

4. Calculation is to be made possible by the establishment of an
artificial quasi-market. This scheme is dealt with in section 5 of this
chapter.
5. Calculation is to be made with the aid of the differential equations of mathematical catallactics. This scheme is dealt with in section
6 of this chapter.
6. Calculation is to be madc superfluous by resorting to the method
of trial and error. This idea is dealt with in section 4 of this chapter.

4. Trial and E r r o r

-.
I he entrepreneurs and capitalists do not have advance assurance
about whether their plans are the most appropriate solution for the
allocation of factors of production to the various branchcs of industry.
It is only later experience that shows them after the event whether
they were right or wrong in their enterprises and investments. T h e
method they apply is the neth hod of trial and error. W h y , say some
sociaIists, should not the socialist director resort to the samc method?
T h e method of trial and error is applicable in all cases in which
the correct solution is recognizable as such b y unmistakable marks
not dependent on the method of trial and error itself. If a man mislays his wallet, he may hunt for it in various places. If he finds it, he
recognizes it as his property; there is no doubt about the success of
the method of trial and error applied; he has solved his problem. when
Ehrlich was looking for a r e ~ n e d yfor syphilis, he tested hundreds of
drugs until he found what he was searching for, a drug that killed the
spirochetes without damaging the human body. The mark of the
correct solution, the drug number 606, was that i t combined these two
quaIities, as could be learned from laboratory experiment and from
clinical experience.
Things are quite diffcrcnt if the only mark of the correct solution
is that it has been reached b y the applkation of a method considered
appropriate for thc solution of the problem. 'The correct result of a
multiplication of two factors is recognizable only as the result of a
correct application of the process indicated by arithmctic. One may
try to guess the correct result by trial and crror. But here the method
of trial and error is no substitute for the arithmetical process. It would
be quite futile if the arithmetical process did not provide a yardstick
for discrin~inatingwhat is incorrect from what is correct.
If one wants to call entrepreneurial action an application of the
method of trial and error, one must not forget that the correct solution
is easily recognizable as such; it is the emergence of a surplus of pro-

Economic Calczdation vnder Socialism

701

ceeds over costs. Profit tells the entrepreneur that the consumers approve of his ventures; loss, that they disapprove.
The problem of socialist economic calculation is precisely this:
that in the absence of market prices for the factors of production, a
computation of profit or loss is not feasible.
W e may assume that in the socialist commonwealth there is a market
for consumers' goods and that money prices for consumers' goods are
determined on this market. W e may assume that the director assigns
periodically to every member a certain amount of money and sells the
consumers' goods to those bidding the highest prices. Or we may as
well assume that a certain portion of the various consumers' goods
in kind is allotted to each member and that the members are free to
exchange these goods against other goods on a market in which
the transactions are effected through a common medium of exchange,
a sort of money. But the characteristic mark of the socialist system is
that the producers' goods are controIled by one agency only in whose
name the director acts, that they are neither bought nor sold, and
that there are no prices for them. Thus there cannot be any question
of comparing input and output by the methods of arithmetic.
W e do not assert that the capitalist mode of economic calculation
guarantees the absolutely best solution of the allocation of factors of
production. Such absolutely perfect solutions of any problem are
out of reach of mortal men. What the operation of a market not
sabotaged by the interference of compulsion and coercion can bring
about is merely the best solution accessible to the human rnind under
the given state of technological knowledge and the intellectual abilities
of the age's shrewdest men. As soon as any man discovers a discrepancy
between the real state of production and a realizable better state, the
profit motive pushes him toward the utmost effort to realize his plans.
The sale of his products will show whether he was right or wrong
in his anticipations. The market daily tries the entrepreneurs anew and
eliminates those who cannot stand the test. I t tends to entrust the
conduct of business affairs to those men who have succeeded in filling
the most urgent wants of the consumers. This is the only important
respect in which one can call the market economy a system of trial
and error.
5 . The Quasi-market

The distinctive mark of socialism is the oneness and indivisibility
of the will directing all production activities within the whole social
j. "Better" means, of course, more satisfactory from the point of view of the
consumers buying on the market.

702

Human Action

system. When the socialists decIare that "order" and "organization"
are t o be substituted for the "anarchy" of production, conscious action
for the alleged planlessness of capitalism, true cooperation for competition, production for use for production for profit, what they have
in mind is always the substitution of the exclusive and monopolistic
power of only one agency for the infinite multitude of the plans of
the individual consumers and those attending to the wishes of the consumers, the entrepreneurs and capitalists. T h e essence of socialism is
the entire elimination of the market and of catallactic competition.
The socialist system is a system without a market and market prices
for the factors of production and without competition; it means the
unrestricted centralization and unification of the conduct of all affairs
in the hands of one authority. I n the drafting of the unique plan that
directs all economic activities the citizens cooperate, if at all, only
by electing the director or the board of directors. For the rest they
are only subordinates, bound to obey unconditionally the orders
issued by the director, and wards of whose well-being the director
rakes care. All the excellences the socialists ascribe to socialism and
all the blessings they expect from its realization are described as the
necessary outcome of this absolute unification and centralization.
I t is therefore nothing short of a full acknowledgment of the correctness and irrefutability of the economists' analysis and devastating
critique of the socialists' plans that the intellectuaI leaders of socialism
are now busy designing schemes for a socialist system in which the
market, market prices for the factors of production, and catallactic
competition are to be preserved. T h e overwhelmingly rapid triumph
of the demonstration that no economic calculation is possible under a
socialist system is without precedent indeed in the history of human
thought. T h e socialists cannot help admitting their crushing final
defeat. They no longer claim that socialism is tnatchlessly superior to
capitalism because it brushes away markets, market prices, and competition. On the contrary. They are now eager to justify socialism by
pointing out that it is possible to preserve these institutions even under
socialism. They are drafting outlines for a socialism in which there are
prices and co~npetition.~
W h a t these neosocialists suggest is really paradoxical. They want
to abolish private control of the means of production, market exchange, market prices, and competition. But at the same time they
want to organize the socialist utopia in such a way that people could
4. This refers, of course, only to those socialists or communists who, like professors H. D. Dicliinson and Oskar Lange, are conversant with economic thought.
T h e dull hosts of the "intellectuaIs" will not abandon their superstitious belief
in the superiority of socialism. Superstitions die hard.

Economic Calczdation under Socialism

703

act as if these things were still present. They want people to play
market as children pIay war, railroad, or school. They do not comprehend how such childish play differs from the real thing it tries to
imitate.
I t was, say these neosocialists, a serious mistake on the part of the
older socialists (i.e., of all socialists before 1920) to believe that socialism necessarily requires the abolition of the market and of market
exchange and even that this fact is both the essential elemcnt and
the preeminent feature of a socialist economy. This idea is, as they
reluctantly admit, preposterous and its realization would result in a
chaotic muddle. But fortunately, they say, there is a better pattern for
socialism available. It is possible to instruct the managers of the
various production units to conduct the affairs of their unit in the
same way they did under capitalism. The manager of a corporation
operates in the market society not on his account and at his own
peril, but for the bencfit of thc corporation, i.e., the shareholders. He
will go on under socialism in the same way with the same care and
attention. The only difference will consist in the fact that the fruits
of his endeavors will enrich the whole society, not the shareholders.
For the rest he will buy and sell, recruit and pay workers, and try to
make profits in the same way he did before. The transition from the
managerial system of mature capitalism to the managerial system of
the planned socialist commonwealth will be smoothly effected. Nothing will change except the ownership of the capital invested. Society
wilI be substituted for the shareholders, the people will henceforth
pocket the dividends. That is all.
Thc cardinal fallacy implied in this and all kindred proposals is
that they look at the economic problem from the perspective of the
subaltern clerk whose intellectual horizon does not extend beyond
subordinate tasks. They consider the structure of industrial pr&uction and the allocation of capital to the various branches and production aggregates as rigid, and do not take into account the necessity
of altering this structure in order to adjust it to changes in conditions.
What they have in mind is a world in which no further changes occur
and economic history has reached its final stage. They fail to realize
that the operations of the corporate officers consist merely in the
loyal execution of the tasks entrusted to them by thcir bosses, the
shareholders, and that in performing the orders received they are
forced to adjust themselves to the structure of the market prices,
ultimately determined by factors other than the various manageria1
operations. The operations of the managers, their buying and selling,
are only a small segment of the totality of market operations. The

704

Human Action

market of the capitalist society also performs all those operations
which allocate the capital goods to the various branches of industry.
The entrepreneurs and capitalists establish corporations and other
firms, enlarge or reduce their size, dissolve them or merge them
with other enterprises; they buy and selI the shares and bonds of
already existing and of new corporations; they grant, withdraw,
and recover credits; in short they perform all those acts the totality
of which is called the capital and money market. It is these financial
transactions of promoters and speculators that direct production
into those channels in which it satisfies the most urgent wants of
the consumers in the best possible way. These transactions constitute the market as such. If one eliminates them, one does not preserve
any part of the market. What remains is a fragment that cannot exist
alone and cannot function as a market.
The role that the loyal corporation manager plays in the conduct
of business is much more modest than the authors of these plans assume.
His is only a managerial function, a subsidiary assistance granted to
the entrepreneurs and capitalists, which refers only to subordinate
tasks. It can never become a substitute for the entrepreneurial funct i o n . T h e speculators, promoters, investors and moneylenders, in
determining the structure of the stock and commodity exchanges and
of the money market, circumscribe the orbit within which definite
minor tasks can be entrusted to the manager's discretion. In attending
to these tasks the manager must adjust his procedures to the structure
of the market created by factors which go far beyond the managerial
functions.
Our problem does not refer to the managerial activities; it concerns
the allocation of capital to the various branches of industry. The question is: In which branches shouId production be increased or restricted, in which branches should the objective of production be
altered, what new branches shodd be inaugurated? With regard to
these issues it is vain to cite the honest corporation manager and his
weii-tried efficiency. Those who confuse entrepreneurship and management close their eyes to the economic problem. In labor disputes
the parties are not management and labor, but entrepreneurship (or
capital) and the salaried and wage-receiving enlployees. The capitalist
system is not a managerial system; it is an entrepreneurial system. One
does not detract from the merits of corporation managers if one establishes the fact that it is not their conduct that determines the aIlocation of the factors of production to the various lines of industry.
Nobody has ever suggested that the socialist commonwealth could
5. Cf. above, pp. 301-305.

Economic Calculation under Socialis?1.t

705

invite the promoters and speculators to continue their speculations
and then deliver their profits to the conlmon chest. Those suggesting
a quasi-markct for the socialist system have never wanted to preserve
the stock and commodity exchanges, the trading in futures, and the
bankers and moneylenders as quasi-institutions. One cannot play speculation and investment. T h e speculators and investors expose thcir own
wealth, their own destiny. This fact makcs them responsible to the consumers, the ultimate bosses of the capitalist economy. If one relieves
them of this responsibility, one deprives them of thcir very character.
They are no longer businessmen, but just a group of men to whom the
director has handed over his main task, the supreme direction of the
conduct of affairs. Then they-and not the nominal director-become the true directors and have to face the same problem thc nominal
director could not solve: the problem of calculation.
In recognition of the fact that such an idea would be simply nonsensical, the advocates of the quasi-market plan sometimes vaguely
recommend another way out. T h e director should act as a bank
lending the available funds t o the highest biddcr. This again is an
abortive idea. All those who can bid for these funds have, as is scIfevident in a socialist order of society, no property of their own. In
bidding they are not restrained by any financial dangers they themselves run in promising too high a rate of interest for the funds borrowed. T h e y do not in the lcast alleviate the burden of responsibility
incumbent upon the director. T h e insecurity of the funds lent to
them is in no way restricted by the partial guarantec which the borrower's own means provide in credit transactions under capitalism.
All the hazards of this insecurity fall only upon society, the exclusive
owner of all resourccs available. If the director were without hesitation to allocate the funds available to thosc who bid most, he u-odd
simply put a prcmium upon audacity, carelessncss, and unreasonablc
optimism. H e would abdicate in favor of the least scrupulous visionaries or scoundrels. H e must reserve t o himself the decision on how
society's funds should bc utilized. Rut then we are ha& ....in
~ ~ ~ h - r ~
"b""'
we started: the director, in his endeavors to dircct production activities, is not aided by the division of intellectual labor which under
capitalism provides a practicable method for cconomic calc~lation.~
T h e employment of the means of production can bc controlled
either by private owners or by the social apparatus of coercion and
co~npulsion.In the first case there is a market, there arc market prices
for all factors of production, and economic cakulation is possible.
" "--

-

6. Cf. Mises, Socialism, pp. 137-142;Hayek,lndividualinn and Economic Order
(Chicago,19481,pp. I ~p-208.

706
Human Action
In the second case all these things are absent. I t is vain to comfort
oneself with the hope that the organs of the collective economy will
bc "omnipresent" and "omniscient." W e do not deal in praxeology
with the acts of the omnipresent and omniscient Deity, but with the
actions of men endowed with a human mind only. Such a mind cannot plan without economic calcdation.
A socialist system with a marltet and market prices is as selfcontradictory as is the notion of a triangular square. Production is
directed either by profit-seeking businessmen or by the decisions of
a director to whom supreme and exclusive power is entrusted. There
arc produced either those things from the sale of which the entrepreneurs expect thc highest profits or those things which the director
wants to be produced. T h e question is: W h o should be master, the
consumers or the director? With whom shouId the ultimate decision
rest whether a concrete supply of factors of production should be
empIoyed for the production of the consumers' good a or the consumers' good b? Such a question does not allow of any evasive answer.
It must bc answered in a straightforward and unambiguous way.8

6. T h c Diff crential Equations of Mathematical Economics
In order to appraise adequately the idea that: the diffcrential equations of mathematical economics could be utilized for socialist economic calculation, we must remember what these equations really
mean.
In devising the imaginary construction of an evenly rotating economy we assume that a11 the factors of production are employed in
such a way that each of them renders the most highly valued services
it can possibly render. N o further change in the employment of any
of these factors could improve the state of want-satisfaction under
prevailing conditions. This situation, in which no further changes in
the disposition of the factors of production arc resorted to, is described
hy systems of differential eq~zations.Howeveri tlmr eql-~ationsde r?et
provide any information about thc human actions by means of which
the hypothetical statc of equilibrium has been reached. All they say
is this: If, in this state of static equilibrium, m units of n are employed
for the production of p, and n units of n for the production of q, no
furthcr change in the employment of the available units of a could
result in an increment in want-satisfaction. (Even if we assume that a
is perfectly divisible and take the unit of n as infinitesima1, it would
7 . Cf. H. D. nickinson, Economics of Socialism (Oxford, I 939), p. 191.
8. Far an analysis of the scheme of a corporative statc see below, pp. 812-816.

Economic Calculation under Socialism

707

be a serious blunder to assert that the marginal utility of a is the same
in both employments.)
This state of equilibrium is a purely imaginary construction. In a
changing world it can never be realized. I t differs from today's state
as well as from any other realizable state of affairs.
In the market economy it is entrepreneurial action that again and
again reshuffles exchange ratios and the allocation of the factors of
production. A n enterprising man discovers a discrepancy between
the prices of the complementary factors of production and the future
prices of the products as he anticipates them, and tries to take advantage of this discrepancy for his own profit. T h e future price which
he has in mind is, to be sure, not the hypothetical equilibrium price.
N o actor has anything to do with equilibrium and equilibrium prices;
these notions are foreign to real life and action; thcy arc auxiliary tools
of praxeological reasoning for which there is no mental means to conceive the ceaseless restlessness of action other than to contrast it with
the notion of perfect quiet. For the theorists' reasoning every change
is a step forward on a road which, provided no further new data appear, finally leads to a state of equilibrium. Neither the theorists, nor
the capitalists and entrepreneurs, nor the consumers, are in a position
to form, on the ground of their familiarity with present conditions, an
opinion about the height of such an equilibrium price. There is no
need for such an opinion. W h a t impels a man toward change and
innovation is not the vision of equilibrium prices, but the anticipation
of the height of the prices of a limited number of articles as they wilI
prevail on the market on the date at which he plans to sell. What the
entrepreneur, in embarking upon a definite project, has in mind
is only the first steps of a transformation which, provided no changes
in the data occur other than those induced by his project, would result
in establishing the state of equilibrium.
But for a utilization of the equations describing the state of equilibrium, a knowledge of the gradation of the values of consumers'
goods in this state of equilibrium is required. This gradation is one of
the elemcnts of these equations assumed as known. Yet the director
knows only his present valuations, not also his valuations under the
hypothetical statc of equilibrium. H e believes that, with regard to
his present valuations, the allocation of the factors of production is
unsatisfactory and wants to change it. But he knows nothing about
how he himself will value on the day the equilibrium will be reached.
These valuations will reflect the conditions resulting from the successive changes in production he himself inaugurates.
We calI the present day D land the day the equilibrium will be

7 0 ~

Human Action

established D,. Accordingly we name the following magnitudes corresponding to these two days: the scale of valuation of the goods of
the first order V I and V,; the total supply of all original factors of
production O1 and On, the total supply of all produced factors of
production P1 and P,, and summarize O1 P, as MI and On P,
as M,. Finally we call the state of technological knowledge T 1 and
T,. For the solution of the equations a knowledge of V,, On P, =
M,, and T nis required. But what we know today is merely V 1 ,O f
P1 = MI, and T I .
It wouId be impermissible to assume that these magnitudes for Dl
are equal to those for Dn because the state of equilibrium cannot be
attained if further changes in the data occur. The absence of further
changes in the data which is the condition required for the establishment of equilibrium refers only to such changes as could derange the
adjustment of conditions to the operation of those elements which are
already operating today. The system cannot attain the state of equilibrium if new elements, penetrating from without, divert it from those
movements which tend toward the establishment of equilibrium.1°
But as long as the equilibrium is not yet attained, the system is in a
continuous movement which changes the data. The tendency toward
the establishment of equilibrium, not interrupted by the emergence of
any changes in the data coming from without, is in itself a succession
of changes in the data.
Pi is a set of magnitudes that do not correspond to today's valuations. It is the outcome of actions which were guided by past valuations
and faced a state of technological knowledge and of information
about available resources of primary factors of production which
was different from the present state. One of the reasons why the
system is not in equilibrium is precisely the fact that PI is not adjusted
to present conditions. There are plants, tools, and supplies of other
factors of production which would not exist under equilibriun~,and
other plants, tools, and supplies must be produced in order to establish
equiiibrium. Equiiibrium wiii emerge oniy when these disturbing
parts of PI, as far as they are still utilizable, will be worn out and
replaced by items which correspond to the state of the other
synchronous data, viz., V, 0,and T . What acting man needs to know
is not the state of affairs under equilibrium, but information about

+

+

+

+

9. Supply means a total inventory in which the whole supply available is specified in classes and quantities. Each class comprehends only such items as have in
any regard (for instance, aIso in regard to their location) precisely the same importance for want-satisfaction.
10. Of course, we may assume that T Iis equal to T,if wc are prepared to imply that technological knowledge has reached its final stage.

Economic Calczclation under Socialisnz

709

the rnost appropriate method of transforming, by successive steps, P,
into P,. With regard to this task the equations are useless.
One cannot master these problems by eliminating P and relying
only upon 0.It is true that the mode of utilizing the original factors
of production uniquely determines the quality and quantity of the
produced factors of production, the intermediary products. But the
information that could be won in this way refers only to the conditions of equilibrium. It does not tell us anything about the methods
and procedures to be resorted to for the realization of equilibrium.
Today we are confronted with a supply of PI which differs from
the state of equilibrium. W e must take into account real conditions,
i.e., P,, and not the hypothetical conditions of P,,.
This hypothetical future state of equilibrium will appear when all
methods of production have been adjusted to the valuations of the
actors and to the state of technological knowledge. Then one will
work in the most appropriate locations with the most adequate technological methods. Today's economy is different. It operates with other
means which do not correspond to the equilibrium state and cannot
be taken into account in a system of equations describing this state
in mathematical symbols. The knowledge of conditions which will
prevail under equilibrium is useless for the director whose task it is
to act today under present conditions. What he must learn is how to
proceed in the rnost economical way with the means available today
which are the inheritance of an age with different valuations, a different technological knowledge, and diffcrent information about problems of location. He mast know which step is the next he must ~nake.
In this dilemma the equations provide no help.
Let us assume that an isolated country whose economic conditions
are those of Central Europe in the middle of the nineteenth century is
ruled by a director who is perfectly familiar with the American technology of our day. This director knows by and large to what goaI he
should lead the economy of the country entrusted to his care. Yet
even a full knowledge of today's American conditions could not be of
use to him in regard to the problem of transforming by successive
steps, in the most appropriate and expedient way, the given cconomic
system into the system aimed at.
Even if, for the sake of argument, we assume that a tniraculous inspiration has enabled the director without economic calculation to
solve all problems concerning the most advantageous arrangement of
a11 production activities and that the precise image of the final goal
he must aim at is present to his mind, there remain essential problems
which cannot be dealt with without cconomic calculation. For the

Human Action

710

director's task is not to begin from the very bottom of civilization and
to start economic history from scratch. The clcmcnts with the aid
of which he must operate are not only natural resources untouched
by previous utilization. There are also the capital goods produccd in
the past and not convertiblc or not perfectly convertible for new
projects. It is in precisely these artifacts, produced under a constellation in which valuations, technological know-ledge, and many other
things were different from what they are today, that our wealth
is embodicd. Their structure, quality, quantity, and location is of
primary i~nportancein the choice of all further economic operations.
Some of them may be absolutely useless for any furthcr employment;
they must remain "unused capacity." But the greater part of thcm
must be utilized if we do not want to start anew from the extreme
poverty and destitution of primitive man and want to survive the
pcriod which separates us from the day on which the reconstruction
of the apparatus of production according to the new plans will be
accomplished. The director cannot merely erect a new construction
without bothering about his wards' fate in the waiting pcriod. He
r~lusttry to take advantage of cvery piece of the already availablc
capital goods iq thc best possible way.
Not only the technocrats, but socialists of all shades of opinion,
repeat again and again that what makes thc achicvemcnt of their
ambitious plans realizable is the enormous wealth hitherto accumulated. But in the same breath they disregard the fact that
this wealth consists to a great extent in capital goods produced in
the past and more or less antiquated from the point of view of
our present valuations and technological knowledge. As they see
it, the only aim of production is to transform the industrial apparatus in such a way as to make life more abundant for later
generations. In their eyes contemporaries are simply a lost gencration,
people whose onIy purpose it must be to toil and trouble for the
benefit of the unborn. Howevcr, real men are different. They want
t
1
. + ~.; L ~ I I U S U I ~ *LU I1I V G :111, u l ~ y
L l b a b b a
w u i ~ u
L U ~LLILII
themselves also want to enjoy life. They want to utilize in the most
efficient way those capital goods which arc now available. They aim
at a better future, but they want to attain this goal in the most economical way. For thc realization of this desire too they cannot do without economic calculation.
It was a serious mistake to belicve that the state of equilibrium
could be computed, by means of mathematical opcrations, on the
basis of the knowledge of conditions in a noncquilibrium state. It was
no Iess erroneous to beIieve that such a knowledge of the conditions
"A+

UVL

UIU)

t

LV

A

t
t
WLLL~L

-I_---

Economic Calculation under Socialism

711

under a hypothetical state of equilibrium could be of any use for
acting man in his search for the best possible solution of the problems
with which he is faced in his daily choices and activities. There is
therefore no need to stress the point that the fabulous number of
equations which one would have to solve each day anew for a practical utilization of the method would make the whole idea absurd even
if it were realIy a reasonable substitute for the market's economic
cal~ulation.~~
11. With regard to this algebraic problem, cf. Pareto, Manuel d'e'conomie
politique (td ed. Paris, 1927),pp. 233 f.; and Hayek, Collectivist Economic Planning (London, 1935), pp. 207-214.

Part Six

T h e Hampered Market Economy

XXVII. THE GOVERNMENT AND T H E MARKET
I.

T h e Idea of a Third System

RIVATE ownership of the means of production (market economy

P

or capitalism) and public ownership of the means of production
(socialism or communism or "planning") can be neatly distinguished.
Each of these two systems of society's econonlic organization is open
to a precise and unambiguous description and definition. They can
never be confounded with one another; they cannot be mixid or
combined; no gradual transition leads from one of thcm to the other;
their obversion is contradictory. With regard to the same factors of
production there can only exist private control or public control. If in
the frame of a system of social cooperation only some means of production are subject to public ownership while the rest are controlled
by privatc individuals, this does not make for a mixed system combining socialism and private ownership. The system remains a market
society, provided the socialized sector does not become entirely
separated from the non-socialized sector and Iead a strictly autarkic
existence. (In this latter case there are two systems independently
coexisting side by side-a capitalist and a socialist.) Publicly owned
enterprises, operating within a system in which there are privatcly
owned enterprises and a market, and socialized countries, exchanging
goods and services with nonsocialist countries, are integrated into a
system of market economy. They are subject to the law of the market
and have the opportunity of resorting to economic cal~ulation.~
If one considers the idea of placing by the side of these two systems
or between them a third system of liiiman cooperation urider the
division of labor, one can always start only from the notion of the
market economy, never from that of socialism. The notion of socialism
with its rigid monism and centralism that vests the power to choose
and to act in one will exclusively does not allow of any compromise
or concession; this construction is not amenable to any adjustment
or alteration. But it is different with the scheme of the market economy. Here the dualism of the market and the government's power of
coercion and compulsion suggests various ideas. Is it really peremptory
I . See above, pp. 259-260.

T h e Government and the Market

77.3

or expedient, people ask, that the government keep itself out of the
market? Should it not be a task of government to interfere and to
correct the opcration of the market? Is it necessary to put up with
the alternative of capitalism os socialism? Are there not perhaps still
other realizable systems of social organization which are neither communism nor pure and unhampered market economy?
Thus people have contrived a variety of third solutions, of systems
which, it is claimed, are as far from socialism as they are from capitalism. Their authors allege that these systems are nonsocialist because
they aim to preserve private ownership of the means of production and
that they are not capitalistic because they eliminate the "deficiencies"
of the market economy. For a scientific treatment of the problems involved which by necessity is neutral with regard to all value judgments and thcrcfore does not condemn any features of capitalism as
faulty, detrimental, or unjust, this emotional rccommcndation of
interventionism is of no avail. T h e task of economics is to analyze and
to search for truth. It is not called upon to praise or to disapprove from
any standard of preconceived postulates and prejudices. With regard
t o interventionism it has only one question to ask and to answer:
H o w does it work?
2.

The Intervention

There are two patterns for the realization of socialism.
T h e first pattern (we may call it the Lenin or the Russian pattern)
is purely bureaucratic. All pIants, shops, and farms are formally nationalized (verstmtlicht); they are departments of the gover&ent
operated by civil servants. Every unit of the apparatus of production
stands in the same relation to the superior central organization as does
a post office to the office of the postmaster general.
The second pattern (we may calI it the Hindenburg or German
pattern) nominally and seemingly preserves private ownership of
the means of production and keeps the appearance of ordinary
markets, prices, wages, and interest rates. There are, however, no
longer entrepreneurs, but only shop managers (Betriebsfiih~erin the
terminology of the Nazi legislation). These shop managers are seemingly instrumental in the conduct of the enterprises entrusted to them;
they buy and sell, hire and discharge workers and remunerate their
services, contract debts and pay interest and amortization. But in all
their activities they are bound to obey unconditionally the orders
issued by the government's supreme office of production management.
This office (the Reichswirtschaf tsministerim in N x ~ i
Germany) tells

714
Human Action
the shop managers what and how to produce, at what prices and from
whom to buy, at what prices and to whom to sell. It assigns every
worker to his job and fixes his wages. It decrees to whom and on
what terms the capitalists must entrust their funds. Market exchange
is merely a sham. AIl the wages, prices, and interest rates are fixed by
the government; they are wages, prices, and interest rates in appearance only; in fact they are merely quantitative terms in the government's orders determining each citizen's job, income, consumption,
and standard of living. The government directs all production activities. T h e shop managers are subject to the government, not to the
consumers' demand and the market's price structure. This is socialism
under the outward guise of the terminology of capitalism. Some labels
of the capitalistic market economy are retained, but they signify
something entirely different from what they mean in the market
economy.
It is necessary to point out this fact in order to prevent a confusion
of socialism and interventionism. The system of interventionism or of
the hampered market economy differs from the German pattern of
socialism by the very fact that it is still a market economy. The authority interferes with the operation of the market economy, but does not
want to eliminate the market altogether. It wants production and
consumption to develop aIong lines different from those prescribed
by an unhampered market, and it wants to achieve its aim by injecting
into the working of the market orders, commands, and prohibitions
for whose enforcement the police power and its apparatus of violent
compulsion and coercion stand ready. But these are isolated acts of
intervention. It is not the aim of the government to combine them into
an integrated system which determines all prices, wages and interest
rates and thus places full control of production and consumption into
the hands of the authorities.
T h e system of the hampered market economy or interventionism
aims at preserving the dualism of the distinct spheres of government
acdvities en the one hand am! ecenemic freedem uxdcr the mzrket
system on the other hand. What characterizes it as such is the fact
that the government does not limit its activities to the preservation of
private ownership of the means of production and its protection
against violent encroachments. The government interferes with the
operation of business by means of orders and prohibitions.
The intervention is a decree issued, directly or indirectly, by the
authority in charge of the administrative apparatus of coercion and
compulsion which forces the entrepreneurs and capitalists to employ
some of the factors of production in a way different from what they

The Government and the Market

715

would have resorted to if they were only obeying the dictates of the
market. Such a decree can be either an order to do something or an
order not to do something. I t is not required that the decree be issued
directly b y the established and generally recognized authority itself.
It may happen that some other agencies arrogate to themselves the
power to issue such orders or prohibitions and to enforce them by an
apparatus of violent coercion and oppression of their own. If the
recognized government tolerates such procedures or even supports
them by the employment of its governmental police apparatus, matters stand as if the government itself had acted. If the government
is opposed to other agencies' violent action, but does not succecd in
suppressing it by means of its own armed forces, although it wouId
like to suppress it, anarchy results.
It is important to remember that government interference always
means either violent action or the threat of such action. Government
is in the last resort the employment of armed men, of policemen,
gendarmes, soldiers, prison guards, and hangmen. T h e essential feature
of government is the enforcement of its decrees b y beating, killing,
and imprisoning. Those who are asking for more government interference are asking ultimately for more compulsion and less freedom.
T o draw attention to this fact does not imply any reflection upon
government activities. In stark reality, peaceful social cooperation is
impossible if no provision is made for violent prevention and suppression of antisocial action on the part of refractory individuals and
groups of individuals. One must take exception to the often repeated
phrase that government is an evil, although a necessary and indispensable evil. What is required for the attainment of an end aimed at is
a means, the cost to be expended for its successful realization. I t is an
arbitrary value judgment to describe it as an evil in the moral connotation of the term. However, in face of the modern tendencies toward
a deification of government and state, it is good to remind ourselves
that the old Romans were more realistic in symbolizing the state by
a bundle of rods with an ax in the middle than are our contemporaries
in ascribing to the state all the attributes of God.

3. T h e Delimitation of Governmental Functions
Various schools of thought parading under the pompous names of
philosophy of law and political science indulge in futile and empty
brooding over the delimitation of the functions of government. Starting from purely arbitrary assumptions concerning allegedly eternal
and absolute values and perennial justice, they arrogate to themselves

716

Human Action

the office of the supreme judge of earthIy affairs. They misconstrue
their own arbitrary value judgments derived from intuition as the
voice of the Almighty or the nature of things.
There is, however, no such thing as natural law and a perennial
standard of what is just and what is unjust. Nature is alien to the idea
of right and wrong. "Thou shalt not kill" is certainly not part of
natural law. The characteristic feature of natural conditions is that
one animal is intent upon killing other animals and that many species
cannot preserve their own life except by killing others. The notion of
right and wrong is a human device, a utilitarian precept designed to
make social cooperation under the division of labor possible. All moral
rules and human laws are means for the realization of definite ends.
There is no method available for the appreciation of their goodness or
badness other than to scrutinize their usefulness for the attainment of
the ends chosen and aimed at.
From the notion of natural law some people deduce the justice of
the institution of private property in the means of production. Other
people resort to natural law for the justification of the abolition of
private property in the means of production. As the idea of natural
law is quite arbitrary, such discussions are not open to settlement.
State and government are not ends, but means. Inflicting evil upon
other people is a source of direct pleasure only to sadists. Established
authorities resort to coercion and compulsion in order to safeguard
the smooth operation of a definite system of social organization. The
sphere in which coercion and compulsion is applied and the content
of the laws which are to be enforced by the police apparatus arc conditioned by the social order adopted. As state and government are
designed to make this social system operate safely, the delimitation of
governmental functions must be adjusted to its requirements. The
only standard for the appreciation of the laws and the methods for
their enforcement is whether or not they are emcicnt in safeguarding
the social order which it is desired to prcscrve.
T L - ---:---f :.-..L--

--I--

-- I-.....--

J-C-!..-

I IIG l l U L l U l l U l JUbLICC I l l d K L S SCllSL U l l l Y WIICIl i C l G l l l l l ~LU ';I UGILIllLI~

system of norms which in itself is assumed to be uncontested and
safe against any criticism. Many peoples have clung to the doctrine
that what is right and what is wrong is established from the dawn of the
remotest ages and for eternity. The task of legislators and courts was
not to make the laws, but to find out what is right by virtue of the
unchanging idea of justice. This doctrine, which resulted in an
adamant conservatism and a petrification of old customs and jnstitutions, was challenged by the doctrine of natural right. T o the positive
laws of the country the notion of a "higher" law, the law of nature,

T h e Go,vernnzent and the Market

7'7

was opposed. From the arbitrary standard of natural law the valid
statutes and institutions were called just or unjust. T o the good legislator was assigned the task of making the positive laws agree with the
natural law.
The fundamental errors involved in these two doctrines havc long
since bccn unmasked. For those not deluded by them it is obvious
that the appeal to justice in a debate concerning the drafting of new
laws is an instance of circular reasoning. Ile lege ferenda there is no
such a thing as justice. The notion of justice can logicaIly onIy be
resorted to de lege lata. It makes sense only when approving or disapproving concrcte conduct from thc point of view of the valid laws
of the country. In considering changes in the nation's legal system, in
rewriting or repealing existing l a w and writing new laws, the issue is
not justice, but social expediency and social wclfarc. Therc is no such
thing as an absolute notion of justicc not referring to a definite system
of social organization. It is not justice that determines the decision in
favor of a definite socia1 system. It is, on the contrary, the social
system which detcrmines what should be deemed right and what
wrong. Thcrc is neither right nor wrong outside the social ncxus. For
the hypothetical isolated and self-sufficient individual the notions of
just and unjust arc cmpty. Such an individual can merely distinguish
between what is more expedient and what is less expedient for himseIf.
T h e idea of justice refers always to socia1 cooperation.
I t is nonsensical to justify or to reject interventionism from the
point of view of a fictitious and arbitrary idea of absolute justice. I t
is vain to ponder over the just delimitation of the tasks of government
from any preconceived standard of perennial values. It is no less impermissible to deduce the proper tasks of govcrnment from the very
notions of government, state, law and justice. It was precisely this that
was absurd in the speculations of medieval scholasticism, of Fichte,
Schelling, and Hegel, and of German Begrifl'sjz~~ispn~denz.
Conceprs are tools of reasoning. They must never he considered as r e p lative principlcs dictating modes of conduct.
I t is a display of supererogatory mental gymnastics to emphasize
that the notions of state and sovereignty logically imply absolute
supremacy and thus preclude the idea of any limitations on the state's
activities. Xobody questions the fact that a state has the power to
establish totalitarianism within the territory in which it is sovereign.
The problem is whether or not such a mode of government is expedient from the point of view of the preservation and functioning
of social cooperation. With regard to this problem no sophisticated exegesis of concepts and notions can be of any use. It must be

718

Human Action

decided by praxeology, not by a spurious n~etaphysicsof state and
right.
T h e philosophy of law and political science arc at a loss to discover
any reason why government should not control prices and not punish
those defying the price ceilings decreed, in the same way as it punishes
murderers and thieves. As they see it, the institution of private
property is merely a revocable favor graciously granted by the almighty sovereign to the wretched individuals. There cannot be any
wrong in repealing totally or partially the laws that granted this favor;
no reasonable objection can be raised against cxpropriation and confiscation. The legislator is free to substitute any social system for that
of the private ownership of the means of production, just as he is
free to substitute another national anthem for that adopted in the
past. The formula car tcl est notre bun plaisir is the only maxim of
the sovereign lawgiver's conduct.
As against all this formalism and legal dogmatism, there is need to
emphasize again that the only purpose of the laws and the social apparatus of coercion and compulsion is to safeguard the smooth functioning of social cooperation. It js obvious that the government has the
power to decree maximum prices and to imprison or to execute those
selling or buying at a higher price. But the question is whcther such a
policy can or cannot attain the ends which the government wants
to attain by resorting to it. This is a purely praxeological and economic
problem. Seither the philosophy of law nor political science can contribute anything to its solution.
The problem of interventionism is not a problcm of the correct
delimitation of the "natural," "just," and "adequate" tasks of state
and government. The issue is: How does a system of interventionism
work? Can it realize those ends which people, in resorting to it, want
to attain?
The confusion and lack of judgment displayed in dealing with the
problems of interventionism are amazing indeed. There are, for instance, peopie who argue thus: it is obvious that traffic reguiations on
the public roads are necessary. Nobody objects to the government's
interference with the car driver's conduct. The advocates of laissez
fairc contradict themselves in fighting government interference with
market priccs and yet not advocating the abolition of government
traffic regulation.
T h e fallacy of this argument is manifest. The regulation of traffic
on a road is one of the tasks incumbent upon the agency that operates
the road. If this agency is the government or the municipality, it is
bound to attend to this task. It is the task of a railroad's management

The Goz~ernmentand the Market

719

to fix the timetable of the trains and it is the task of a hotel's nianagement to decide whether or not there should be music in the dining
room. If the government operates a railroad or a hotel, it is the government's task to regulate these things. It is not an instance of government
interference with the operation of the market economy that the postmaster general chooses the pattern and the color of the postage stamps.
With a state opera the government decides which operas should be
produced and which not; it is a non sequitur to deduce from this fact
that it is also a task of the government to decide these things for a
nongovernmental opera.

4. Righteousness as the Ultimate Standard of the Irzdividual's

Actions
According to a widespread opinion it is possible, even in the absence
of government interference with business, co divert the operation of
the market economy from those lines aloncr which it would develop
if left to exclusive control by the ~ r o f i tmotive. Advocates of a social
reform to be accomplished by compliance with the principles of
Christianity or with the demands of "true" morality maintain that
conscience should also guide well-intentioned people in their dealings
oh the market. If a11 peopIe were prepared not only to concern themselves selfishly about profit, but no less about thcir religious and moral
obligations, no government compulsion and coercion would be required in order to put things right. What is needed is not a reform
of government and the laws of the country, but the moral purification
of man, a return to the Lord's commandments and to the precepts of
the moral code, a turning away from the vices of greed and selfishness.
Then it wilI be easy to reconcile private ownership of the means of
production with justice, righteousness, and fairness. The disastrous
effects of capitalism will be eliminated without prejudice to the individnal's freedom and initiative. People will dethrone the Moloch
capitalism without enthroning the Moloch state.
The arbitrary value judgments which arc at the bottom of these
opinions need not concern us here. What these critics blame capitalism
for is irrelevant; their errors and fallacies are beside the point. What
does matter is the idea of erecting a social system on the twofold
basis of private property and of moral principles restricting the utilization of private property. T h e system recommended. say its advocates,
wilI be neither socialism nor capitalism nor intervdntionisrn. Not
socialism, because it will preserve private ownership of the means of
production; not capitalism, because conscience will be supreme and

Hz~manAction
720
not the urge for profit; not interventionism, because there will be
no need for government interference with the market.
In the market economy the individual is free to act within the
orbit of private property and the market. His choices are final. For
his fellow men his actions are data which they must take into account
in their own acting. The coordination of the autonomous actions of
all individuals is accomplished by the operation of the market. Society
does not tell a man what to do and what not to do. There is no need
to enforce cooperation by special orders or prohibitions. Noncooperation penalizes itself. Adjustment to the requirements of society's
productive effort and the pursuit of the individual's own concerns are
not in conflict. Consequently no agency is required to settle such
conflicts. The system can work and accomplish its tasks without thc
interference of an authority issuing special orders and prohibitions
and punishing those who do not comply.
Beyond the sphere of private property and the market lies the
sphere of compulsion and coercion; here are the dams which orgmized
society has built for the protection of private property and the market
against violence, malice, and fraud. This is the realm of constraint as
distinguished from the realm of freedom. Here are rulcs discriminating
between what is legal and what is illegal, what is permitted and what is
prohibitcd. And here is a grim machine of arms, prisons, and gallows
and the men operating it, ready to crush those who dare to disobey.
Now, the reformers with whose plans we are concerned suggest
that along with the norms designed for the protcction and preservation of private property further ethical rules should be ordained. They
want to realize in production and consumption things other than those
realized under the social order in which the individuals are not
checked by any obligation other than that of not infringing upon the
persons of their fellow men and upon the right of private property.
They want to ban those motives that direct the individual's action in
the market economy (they call them selfishness, acquisitiveness,
profit-seekingj and to repiace them with other impuises (they caii
them conscientiousness,righteousness, altruism, fear of God, charity).
They are convinced that such a moral reform would in itself be sufficient to safeguard a mode of operation of the economic system, more
satisfactory from their point of view than that of unhampered capitalism, without any of those special governmental measures which interventionism and socialism require.
The supporters of these doctrines fail to recognize the role which
those springs of action they condemn as vicious play in the operation
of the market economy. T h e only reason why the market economy

The Government and the Market

721

can operate without government orders telling everybody precisely
what he should do and how he should do it is that it does not ask anybody to deviate from those lines of conduct which best serve his own
interests. What integrates the individual's actions into the whole of
the socia1 system of production is the pursuit of his own purposes.
In indulging in his "acquisitiveness" each actor contributes his share
to the best possible arrangement of production activities. Thus, within
the sphere of private property and the laws protecting it against encroachments on the part of violent or fraudulent action, there is no
antagonism between the interests of the individual and those of
society.
The market economy becomes a chaotic muddle if this predominance of private property which the reformers disparage as selfishness is eliminated. In urging peoplc to listen to the voice of their conscience and to substitute considerations of public welfare for those
of private profit, one does not create a working and satisfactory social
order. It is not enough to tell a man not to buy on the cheapest market
and not to sell on the dearest market. It is not enough to tell hiin not
to strive after profit and not to avoid losses. One must estabIish unambiguous rules for the guidance of conduct in each concrete situation.
Says the reformer: The entrepreneur is rugged and selfish when,
taking advantage of his own superiority, he underbids the prices asked
by a less efficient competitor and this forces the man to go out of
business. But how should the "altruistic" entrepreneur proceed?
Should he under no circumstances sell at a price lower than any competitor? Or are there certain conditions which justify underbidding
the competitor's prices?
Says the reformer on the other hand: The entrepreneur is rugged
and selfish when, taking advantage of the structure of the market, he
asks a price so high that poor peoplc are excluded from purchasing the
merchandise. But what should the "good" entrepreneur do? Should
he give away the merchandise free of charge? If he charges any price,
however low, there will always be peoplc who cannot buy at all or
not so much as they would buy if the price were still lower. What
group of those eager to buy is the entrepreneur free to exclude from
getting the merchandise?
There is no need to deal at this point of our investigation with the
consequences resulting from any deviation from the height of prices
as determined on an unhampered market. If the seller avoids undcrbidding his less efficient competitor, a part at least of his supply remains unsold. If the seller offers the merchandise at a price lower than

Human Action
that determined on an unhampered market, the supply available is
insufficient to enable all those ready to expend this lower price to get
what they are asking for. W e will analyze later these as well as other
consequences of any deviation from the market prices.What we must
recognize even at this point is that one cannot content oneself simply
by telling the entrepreneur that he should not let himself be guided
by the state of the market. It is imperative to tell him how far he must
go in asking and paying prices. If it is no longer profit-seeking that
directs the entrepreneurs' actions and determines what they produce
and in what quantities, if the entrepreneurs are no longer bound by
the instrumentality of the profit motive to serve the consumers to
the best of their abilities, it is necessary to give them definite instructions. One cannot avoid guiding their conduct by specified orders and
prohibitions, precisely such decrees as are the mark of government
interference with business. Any attempt to render such interference
supertluous by attributing primacy to the voice of conscience, to
charity and brotherly love, is vain.
T h e advocates of a Christian social reform pretend that their ideal
of greed and profit-seeking tamed and restrained by conscientiousness
and compliance with the moral law worked rather well in the past.
All the evils of our day are caused by defection from the precepts
of the church. If people had not defied the commandments and had
not coveted unjust profit, mankind would stiIl enjoy the bliss experienced in the Middle Ages when at least the elite lived up to the
principles of the Gospels. What is needed is to bring back those good
old days and then to see that no new apostasy deprives men of their
beneficent effects.
There is no need to enter into an analysis of the social and economic
conditions of the thirteenth century which these reformers praise
as the greatest of all periods of history. W e are concerned merely with
the notion of just prices and wage rates which was essential in the
social teachings of the doctors of the church and which the reformers
want to ralse to the position of the ultimate standard of economic
conduct.
It is obvious that with theorists this notion of just prices and wage
rates always refers and always referred to a definite social order which
they considered the best possible order. They recommend the adoption of their ideal scheme and its preservation forever. No further
changes are to be tolerated. Any alteration of the best possible state
of social affairs can only mean deterioration. The world view of these
philosophers does not take into account man's ceaseless striving for
2.

See below, pp. 752-761.

The Governwzent and the Market

723
improvement of the material conditions of well-being. Historical
change and a rise in the general standard of living are notions foreign
to them. They calI "just" that mode of conduct that is compatible
with the undisturbed preservation of their utopia, and everything
else unjust.
However, the notion of just prices and wage rates as present to the
mind of people other than philosophers is very different. When the
nonphilosopher calls a price just, what he means is that the preservation of this price improves or at least does not impair his own revenues
and station in society. He calls unjust any price that jeopardizes his
own wealth and station. I t is "just" that the prices of those goods and
services which he sells rise more and more and that the prices of those
goods and services he buys drop more and more. T o the farmer no
price of wheat, howevcr high, appears unjust. T o the wage earner no
wage rates, however high, appear unfair. But the farmer is quick to
denounce every drop in the price of wheat as a violation of divine
and human laws, and the wage earners rise in rebellion when their
wages drop. Yet the market society has no means of adjusting production to changing conditions other than the operation of the market.
By means of price changes it forces people to restrict the production
of articles less urgently asked for and to expand the production of
those articles for which consumers' demand is more urgent. The
absurdity of a11 endeavors to stabilize prices consists precisely in the
fact that stabilization would prevent any further improvement and result in rigidity and stagnation. The flexibility of commodity prices and
wage rates is the vehicle of adjustment, improveme~t,and progress.
Those who condemn changes in prices and wage rates as unjust, and
who ask for the preservation of what they call just, are in fact combating endeavors to make economic conditions more satisfactory.
I t is not unjust that there has long prevailed a tendency toward such
a determination of the prices of agricultural products that the greater
part of the population abandoned farming and moved toward the
processing industries. But for this tendency, 90 per cent or more of
the population would still be occupied in airiculture and the processing industries would have been stunted in their growth. All strata of
the population, including the farmers, would be worse off. If Thomas
Aquinas' doctrine of the just price had been put into practice, the
thirteenth century's economic conditions would still prevail. Population figures would be much smaller than they are today and the
standard of living much lower.
Both varicties of the just-price doctrine, the philosophical and the
popular, agree in their condemnation of the prices and wage rates as

724

Human Action

determined on the unhampered market. But this negativism does not
in itself provide any answer to the question of what height the just
prices and wage rates should attain. If righteousness is to be elevated to
the position of the ultimate standard of economic action, one must
unambiguously tell every actor what he should do, what prices he
should ask, and what prices he should pay in each concrete case, and
one must force-by recourse to an apparatus of violcnt compulsion
and coercion-all those venturing disobedience to comply with these
orders. One must establish a supreme authority issuing norms and
regulating conduct in every respect, altcring these norms if need be,
interpreting them authentically, and enforcing them. Thus the substitution of social justice and righteousness for selfish profit-seeking requires for its realization preciscly those policies of government interference with business which the advocates of the moral purification
of mankind want to ~nakesuperfluous. N o deviation from the unhampered market economy is thinkable without authoritarian rcgimentation. U7hether the authority in which these powcrs are vested is
called lay government or theocratical priesthood makes no diffcrcnce.
T h e reformers, in exhorting people to turn away from selfishness,
address themselves to capitalists and entrepreneurs, and sometimes, although only timidly, to wage earners as well. Ilowcvcr, the market
economy is a system of consumers' supremacy. The sermonizers
should appeal to consumers, not to producers. They should persuade
the consumers to renounce preferring better and cheaper merchandise
to poorer and dearer merchandise lest they hurt the less efficient producer. They should persuade them to restrict their own purchases
in order to provide poorcr people with the opportunity to buy more.
If one wants the consumers to act in this way, one must tell them
plainly what to buy, in what quantity, from whom, and at what prices;
and one must provide for cnforcing such orders by coercion and coinpulsion. But thcn one has adopted exactly that system of authoritarian
control which moral reform wants to make unnecessary.
U7hatever freedom individuals can enjoy within the framework
of social cooperation is conditional upon the concord of private gain
and public weal. Within the orbit in which the individual, in pursuing his own well-being, advances also-or at least does not impair-the
well-being of his fellow men, people going their own ways jeopardize
neither the preservation of society nor the concerns of other peoplc.
A realm of freedom and individuaI initiative emerges, a realm in which
man is allowed to choose and to act of his own accord. This sphere of
economic freedom is the basis of all the other freedoms cornpatibIe
with cooperation under the division of labor. It is the market economy

T h e Government and the Market
or capitalism with its political corollary (the Marxians would have to
say: with its "superstructure"), representative government.
Those who contend that there is a conflict between the acquisitiveness of various individuals or between the acquisitiveness of individuaIs on the one hand and the commonweal on the other, cannot avoid
advocating the suppression of the individuals' right to choose and to
act. They must substitute the supremacy of a central board of production management for the discretion of the citizens. In their scheme
of the good society there is no room left for private initiative. The
authority issues orders and everybody is forced to obey.

5 . T h e Meaning of Laissez Faire
In eighteenth-century France the saying laissez faire, laissez
passer was the formula into which some of the champions of the
cause of liberty compressed their program. Their aim was the establishment of the unhampered market society. In order to attain this end
they advocated the abolition of all Iaws preventing more industrious
and more efficient people from outdoing less industrious and less
efficient competitors and restricting the mobility of commodities and
of men. It was this that the famous maxim was designed to express.
In our age of passionate longing for government onlnipotence the
formula laissez faire is in disrepute. Public opinion now considers it
a manifestation both of moral depravity and of the utmost ignorance.
As the interventionist sees things, the alternative is "automatic
forces7' or "conscious planning." It is obvious, he implies, that to
rely upon automatic processes is sheer stupidity. No reasonable man
can seriously rccornmend doing nothing and letting things go as they
do without interference on the part of purposive action. A plan, by
the very fact that it is a display of conscious action, is incomparably
superior to the absence of any planning. Laissez faire is said to mean:
Let the evils last, do not try to improve the lot of mankind by reasonable action.
This is utterly falIacious talk. The argument advanced for planning
is entirely derived from an impermissible interpretation of a Inetaphor. It has no foundation other than the connotations implied in
the term "automatic" which it is customary to apply in a metaphorical
sense for the description of the market p r o c e s ~ . ~
Automatic, says the
Concise Oxford Dictionar~,~
means "unconsciom, unintelligent,
3. Cf. A. H. Hansen, "Social Planning for Tomorrou7," in T h e United States
after the W a r (Cornell University Lectures, Ithaca, 1945), pp. 32-33.
4. See above, pp. 311-312.
5. (3d ed. Oxford, 19341,p. 74.

Human Action
merely mechanical." Automatic, says Webster's Collegiate Dictionary,"eans
"not subject to the control of the will, . . performed
without active thought and without conscious intention or direction."
What a triumph for the champion of planning to play this trump card!
The truth is that the alternative is not benveen a dead mechanism
or a rigid automatism on one hand and conscious planning on the
other hand. The alternative is not plan or no plan. The question is
whose planning? Should each member of society plan for himself,
or should a benevolent government alone plan for them all? The
issue is not automatisnr versus conscious action; it is autonomous
action of each individual versus the exclusive action of the government. It is freedom versus government omnipotence.
Laissez faire does not mean: Let soulless mechanical forces operate.
It means: Let each individual choose how hc wants to cooperate in
the social division of labor; let the consumers determine what the
entrepreneurs should produce. Planning means: Let the government
alone choose and enforce its rulings by the apparatus of coercion and
compulsion.
Under laissez faire, says the planner, it is not those goods which
people "really" need that are produced, but those goods from the
sale of which the highest returns are expected. I t is the objective of
planning to direct production toward the satisfaction of the "true"
needs. But who is to decide what the "true" needs are?
Thus, for instance, Profcssor Harold Laski, the former chairman of
the British Labor Party, would determine as the objective of the
planned direction of investment "that the use of the investor's savings
will be in housing rather than in cinemas." It is beside the point
whether or not one agrees with the professor's view that better houses
are more important than moving pictures. It is a fact that the consumers, in spending part of their money for admission to the movies,
have made another choice. If the masses of Great Britain, the same
people whose votes swept the Labor Party into power, were to stop
patronizing the moving pictures and to spend more for comfortable
homes and apartments, profit-seeking business would be forced to
invest more in building ho~nesand apartment houses and less in the
production of expensive pictures. It is Mr. Laski's desire to defy the
wishes of the consumers and to substitute his own will for that of the
consumers. He wants to do away with the democracy of the market
and to establish the absolute rule of a production tsar. He may believe

726

.

6. (5th ed. Springfield, 1946), p. 73.

7. Cf. Laski's broadcast, "Revolution by Consent," reprinted in Talks, X, no.
to (October, 19451~7.

The Government and the Market

727
that he is right from a "higher" point of view, and that as a superman
he is called upon to impose his own valuations on the masses of inferior men. But then he should be frank enough to say so plainly.
All this passionate praise of the supereminence of government action
is but a poor disguise for the individual interventionist's self-deification. The great god State is a great god only because it is expected to
do exclusively what the individual advocate of interventionism wants
to see achieved. Only that plan is genuine which the individual planner
fully approves. All other plans are simply counterfeit. In saying "plan"
what the author of a book on the benefits of pIanning has in mind is,
of course, his own plan alone. H e does not take into account the possibility that the plan which the governrnent puts into practice may
differ from his own plan. T h e various planners agree only with regard
to their rejection of laissez faire, i.e., the individuals' discretion to
choose and to act. They entirely disagree with regard to the choice
of the unique plan to be adopted. T o every exposure of the manifest
and incontestable defects of interventionist policies the champions
of interventionism react in the same way. These faults, they say, were
the results of spurious interventionism; what we are advocating is
good interventionism, not bad interventionism. And, of course, good
interventionism is the professor's own brand.
Laissez faire means: Let the common man choose and act; do not
force him to yield to a dictator.
6. Direct Government Interference with Consumption
In investigating the economic problems of interventionism we do
not have to deal with those actions of the %overnmentwhose aim it
is to influence immediately the consun~er'schoice of consumers' goods.
Every act of government interference with business must indirectly affect consumption. As the government's interference alters the market
data, it nu st also alter the valuations and the conduct of the consumers.
But if the aim of the government is merely to force the consumers
directly to consume goods other than what they would have consumed
in the absence of the government's decree, no special problems emerge
to be scrutinized by economics. I t is beyond doubt that a strong and
ruthless policc appiratus has the power to enforce such decrees.
In dealing with the choices of the consumers we do not ask what
motives induced a man to buy a and not to buy b. We merely investigate what effects on the determination of market prices and thereby
on production were brought about by the concrete conduct of the
consumers. These effects do not depend on the considerations which

728

Human Action

led individuals to buy a and not to buy b; they depend only on the
real acts of buying and abstention from buying. It is immaterial for
the determination of the prices of gas masks whether people buy
them of their own accord or because the government forces everybody to have a gas mask. What alone counts is the size of the demand.
Governments which are eager to keep up the outward appearance of
freedom even when curtailing freedom disguise their direct interference with consumption under the cloak of interference with business.
The aim of American prohibition was to prevent the individual residents of the country from drinking alcoholic beverages. But the law
hypocritically did not make drinking as such illegaI and did not penalize it. I t merely prohibited the manufacture, the sale and the transportation of intoxicating liquors, the business transactions which precede
the act of drinking. The idea was that people indulge in the vice of
drinking only because unscrupulous businessmen prevail upon them.
It was, however, manifest that the objective of prohibition was to encroach upon the individuals' freedom to spend their dollars and to
enjoy their lives according to their own fashion. T h e restrictions imposed upon business were only subservient to this ultimate end.
T h e problems involved in direct government interference with
consumption are not catallactic problems. They go far beyond the
scope of catallactics and concern the fundamental issues of human
life and social organization. If it is true that government derives its
authority from God and is entrusted by Providence to act as the
guardian of the ignorant and stupid populace, then it is certainly its
task to regiment every aspect of the subject's conduct. T h e God-sent
ruler knows better what is good for his wards than they do themselves.
It is his duty to guard them against the harm they would inflict upon
themselves if left alone.
Self-styled "realistic" people fail to recognize the immense importance of the principles implied. They contend that they do not
want to deal with the matter from what, they say, is a philosophic and
academic p&it of view. Their approach is, they argue, exciusivciy
guided by practical considerations. It is a fact, they say, that some
people harm themselves and their innocent families by consuming
narcotic drugs. Only doctrinaires could be so dogmatic as to object
to the government's regulation of the drug traffic. Its beneficent effects
cannot be contested.
However, the case is not so simple as that. Opium and morphine are
certainly dangerous, habit-forming drugs. But once the, principle is
admitted that it is the duty of government to protect the individual
against his own foolishness, no serious objections can be advanced

Tbe Government and the Market

729
against further encroachments. A good case could be made out in
favor of the prohibition of alcohol and nicotine. And why limit the
government's benevolent providence to the protection of the individual's body only? Is not the harm a man can inflict on his mind and
soul even more disastrous than any bodily evils? W h y not prevent
him from reading bad books and seeing bad plays, from looking at
bad paintings and statues and from hearing bad music? The mischief
done by bad idcologies, surely, is much more pernicious, both for
the individual and for the whole society, than that done by narcotic
drugs.
These fears are not merely imaginary specters terrifying secluded
doctrinaires. It is a fact that no paternal government, whether ancient
or modern, ever shrank from regimenting its subjects' minds, beliefs,
and opinions. If one abolishes man's frcedorn to determine his own
consumption, one takes all freedoms away. T h e naive advocates of
government interference with consumption delude then~selveswhen
they neglect what they disdainfully call the philosophical aspect of
the problem. They unwittingly support the case of censorship, inquisition, religious intolerance, and the persecution of dissenters.
In dealing with the catallactics of interventionism we do not discuss
these political consequenccs of direct government interfcrence with
the citizens' consumption. W e are exclusively concerned with those
acts of interference which aim at forcing the entrepreneurs and
capitalists to employ the factors of production in a way different from
what they would have done if they merely obeyed the dictates of the
market. In doing this, we do not raise the question of whether such
interference is good or bad from any preconceived point of view. We
merely ask whether or not it can attain those ends which those advocating and resorting to it are trying to attain.

XXVIII. INTERFERENCE BY TAXATION
1.

T h e Neutral Tax

o keep the social apparatus of coercion and compulsion running
rcquires expenditure of labor and commodities. Under a liberal
system of government these expenditures arc small compared with
the sum of the individuals' incomes. The more the government expands
the sphere of its activities, the more its budget increases.
If the government itself owns and operates plants, farms, forests,
and mines, it might consider covering a part or the whole of its
financial needs from interest and profit earned. But government operation of business enterprises as a rule is so irlefficient that it results in
losses rather than in profits. Governments must resort to taxation, i.e.,
they must raise revcnucs by forcing the subjects to surrender a part
of their wealth or income.
A neutral mode of taxation is conceivable that would not divert the
operation of the market from the lines in which it would develop in
the absence of any taxation. However, the vast literature on problems
of taxation as well as the policies of governments have hardly ever
given thought to the problem of the neutral tax. They have been more
eager to find the j u s t tax.
The neutral tax would affect the conditions of the citizens only to
the extent required by the fact that a part of the labor and material
goods available is absorbed by the government apparatus. In the
imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy the treasury
condnimlly levies taxes and spends the whole amount raised, neither
more nor less, for dcfraying the costs incurred by the activities of
the government's officers. A part of each citizen's income is spent
for public expenditure. If we assume that in such an evenly rotating
economy there prevails perfect income equality in such a way that
every household's income is proportional to the number of its members, both a head tax and a proportional income tax would be ncutral
taxes. Under these assumptions there would be no difference between
them. A part of each citizen's income would be absorbed by public
expenditure, and no secondary effects of taxation would emerge.
The changing economy is entirely different from this imaginary

T

Interference by Taxation

73 7

construction of an evenly rotating economy with income equality.
Continuous change and the inequality of wealth and income are csscntial and necessary features of the changing market economy, the only
real and working system of the market economy. In the frame of such
a system no tax can be neutral. The very idea of a neutral tax is as
unrealizable as that of neutral money. But, of course, the reasons for
this inescapable non-neutrality are different in the case of taxes from
what they are in the case of money.
A head tax that taxes every citizen equally and uniformly without
any regard to the size of his income and wealth, falls more heavily
upon those with more moderate means than upon those with more
ample means. It restricts the production of the articles consumed by
the masses morc sharply than thar of the articles mainly consunled by
the wealthier citizens. On the other hand, it curtails saving and capital
accumulation less than a more burdensome taxation of the weaIthier
citizens does. It does not slow down the tendency toward a drop in
the ~narginalproductivity of capital goods as against the marginal productivity of labor to the same extent as does taxation discriminating
against those with higher income and wealth, and consequently it
does not to the same extent retard the tendency toward a rise in wage
rates.
The actual fiscal policies of all countries are today exclusively
guided by the idea that taxes should be apportioned according to
each citizen's "ability to pay." In the considerations which finaIly
resulted in the general acceptance of the ability-to-pay principle there
was some dim conception that taxing the well-to-do more heavily
than those with moderate means renders a tax somewhat morc neutral.
However this may be, it is certain that any reference to tax neutrality
was very soon entirely discarded. The ability-to-pay principle has
been raised to the dignity of a postulate of social justice. As people see
it today, the fiscal and budgetary objectives of taxation are of secondary importance only. The primary function of taxation is to reform
socia1 conditions according to justice. Taxation is a method of government interference with business. A tax is the more satisfactory the
less neutral it is and the more it serves as a device for diverting production and consumption from those lines into which the unhampered
market would have directed them.
2.

T h e Total T a x

Thc idea of social justice implied in the ability-to-pay principle
is that of perfect financial equality of all citizens. As l.ong as any in-

732
Human Action
equality of income or wealth remains it can as plausibly be argued
that these larger incomes and fortunes, however small their absolute
amount, indicate some excess of ability to be levied upon, as it can be
argued that any existing inequalities of income and weaIth indicate
differences in ability. The only logical stopping place of the abilityto-pay doctrine is at the conlplete equalization of incomcs and wealth
by confiscation of all incomes and fortunes above the lowest amount
in the hands of anyone?
The notion of the total tax is the antithesis of the notion of the
neutral tax. The total tax completely taxes away-confiscates-all
incomes and estates. Then the government, out of the community
chest thus filled, gives to everybody an allowance for defraying the
costs of his sustenance. Or, what comes to the same thing, the government in taxing leaves free that amount which it considers everybody's
fair share and completes the shares of those \$rho have less up to the
amount of their fair share.
The idea of the total tax cannot be thought out to its ultimate logical
consequences. If the cntreprencurs and capitalists do not derive any
personal benefit or damage from their utilization of the means of
production, they become indifferent with rcgard to the choice between various rnodes of conduct. Their social function fades away,
and they become disinterested irresponsible administrators of public
property. They are no longer bound to adjust production to the
wishes of the consumers. If only the income is taxed away while the
capital stock itself is left free, an incentive is offered to the owners
to consume parts of their wealth and thus to hurt the interests of
everyone. A total income tax would be a very inept means for the
realization of socialism. If the total tax affects wealth no less than
income, it is no longer a tax, i.e., a device for colIecting government
revenue within a market economy. It becomes a measure for the transition to socialism. As soon as it is consummated, socialism has been
substituted for capitalism.
Even when looked upon as a method for the realization of socialism,
the total tax is disputable. Some socialists launched plans for a prosocialist tax reform. They recommended either a roo per cent estate and
gift tax or taxing away totally the rent of land or all unearned income
-i.e., in the socialist terminology, all revenue not derived from labor
performed. The examination of these projects is superfluous. It is
enough to know that they are utterly incompatible with the preservation of the market economy.
I. Cf. Harley Lutz, Guideposts to a Free Economy (New York, 1945). p. 76.

Interference by Taxatiovz
3. Fiscal and Xonfiscal Objectives of Taxation
The fiscal and nonfiscal objectives of taxation do not agree with
one another.
Consider, for instance, excise duties on liquor. If one considers them
as a source of government revenue, the more they yield the better
they appear. Of course, as the duty must enhance the price of the
beverage, it restricts sales and consumption. It is necessary to find
out by testing under what rate of duty the yield becomes highest.
But if one looks at liquor taxes as a means of reducing the consumption
of liquor as much as ~ossible,the rate is better the higher it is. Pushed
beyond a certain limit, the tax makes consumption drop considerably,
and also the revenue concomitantly. If the tax fully attains its nonfiscal objective of weaning people entirely from drinking alcoholic
beverages, the revenue is zero. It no longer serves any fiscal purpose;
its effects are merely prohibitive. The same is valid not o11ly with
regard to all kinds of indirect taxation but no less for direct taxation.
Discriminating taxes levied upon corporations and big business would,
if raised above a certain limit, result in the total disappearance of
corporations and big business. Capital levies, inheritance and estate
taxes, and income taxes are similarly self-defeating if carried to extremes.
There is no solution for the irreconcilable conflict between the
fiscal and the nonfiscal ends of taxation. The power to tax is, as Chief
Justice Marshall pertinently observed, the power to destroy. This
power can be used for the destruction of the market economy, and it
is the firm resolution of many governments and parties to use it for
this purpose. With the substitution of socialisnl for capitalism, the
dualism of the coexistence of two distinct spheres of action disappears.
T h e government swallows the whole orbit of the individuals' autonomous actions and becomes totalitarian. It no longer depends for
its financial support on the means exacted from the citizens. There is
no longer any such thing as a separation of public funds and private
funds.
Taxation is a matter of the market economy. It is one of the characteristic features of the market economy that the government does not
interfere with the market phenomena and that its technical apparatus
is so small that its maintenance absorbs only a modest fraction of the
total sum of the individual citizens' incomes. Then taxes are an appropriate vehicle for providing the funds needed by the government.
They are appropriate because they are low and do not perceptibly dis-

7 34

Human Action

arrange production and consumption. If taxes grow beyond a moderate limit, they cease to be taxes and turn into devices for the destruction of the market economy.
This metamorphosis of taxes into weapons of dcstruction is the
mark of prescnt-day public finance. We do not deal with the quite
arbitrary value judgments concerning the problems of whether heavy
taxation is a curse or a benefit and whether the expenditures financed
by the tax yield arc or are not wise and benefi~ial.~
What matters is
that the heavier taxation becomes, the lcss compatible it is with the
preservation of the market economy. There is no need to raise the
question of whether or not it is true that "no country was ever yet
ruined by large expenditures of money by the public and for the
public." "t cannot be denied that the market economy can be ruined
by large public expenditures and that it is the intention of many people
to ruin it in this way.
Businessmen complain about the opprcssivcness of heavy taxes.
Statesmen are alarmed about the danger of "eating the seedcorn."
Yet, the true crux of the taxation issue is to be seen in the paradox that
the more taxes increase, the more they undermine the market economy
and concomitantly the system of taxation itself. Thus the fact becomes
manifest that ukimately the preservation of private property and
confiscatory measures are incompatible. Every specific tax, as well
as a nation's whole tax system, becomes self-defeating above a certain
height of the rates.

4. T h e T h r e e Classes of Tax Interventionism
T h e various methods of taxation which can he used for the regulation of the economy-i.e., as instruments of an interventionist policy
-can be classified in three groups:
I. T h e tax aims at totally suppressing or at restricting the production of definite commodities. It thus indirectly interferes with consumprim too. It does not matter whether this e d is aimed at by tile
imposition of speciaI taxes or by exempting certain products from a
general tax imposed upon all other products or upon those products
which the consumcrs would have preferred in the absence of fiscal
discrimination. Tax exemption is employed as an instrunlent of interventionism in the case of customs duties. T h e domestic product is
not burdened by the tariff which affects only the merchandise imz. This is the customary method of dealing with problems of public finance.
Cf., e.g., Ely, Adams, Lorenz, arid Young, Outlines of Economics (3d ed. New
York, I ~ o )p., 702.
3. Ibid.

Interference by Taxation

735

ported from abroad. Many countries resort to tax discrimination in
regulating domestic production. They try, for instance, to encourage
the production of wine, a product of small or medium-size grape
growers, as against the production of beer, a product of big-size breweries, by submitting beer to a more burdensome excise tax than wine.
2. T h e tax expropriates a part of income or weaIth.
3. T h e tax expropriates income and wealth entirely.
We do not have to deal with the third class, as it is merely a means
for the realization of socialism and as such is outside the scope of
interventionism.
The first class is in its effects not different from the restrictive
measures dealt with in the following chapter.
The second class encompasses confiscatory measures dealt with in
Chapter XXXII.

XXIX. RESTRICTION OF PRODUCTION
I.

The Nature of Restriction

shall deal in this chapter with those measures which are directly
W
and primarily intended to divert production (in the broadest
meaning of the word, including commerce and transportation) from
E

the ways it would take in the unhampered market economy. Each
authoritarian interference with business diverts production, of course.
from the lines it would take if it were only directed by the demand
of the consumers as manifested on the market. T h e characteristic mark
of restrictive interference with production is that the diversion of
production is not merely an unavoidable and unintentional secondary
effect, but precisely what the authority wants to bring about. Like any
other act of intervention, such restrictive measures affect consumption
also. But this again, in the case of the restrictive measures wc arc
dealing with in this chapter, is not the primary end the authority
aims at. The government wants to interfere with production. The
fact that its measure influences the ways of consumption also is, from
its point of view, either altogether contrary to its intentions or at
least an unwelcome consequence with which it puts up because it
is unavoidable and is considered as a minor evil when compared with
the consequences of nonintervention.
Restriction of production means >hat the government either forbids or makes more difficult or more expensive the production, transportation, or distribution of definite articles, or the application of
definite modes of production, transportation, or distribution. The
authority thus eliminates some of the means available for the satisfaction of human wants. T h e effect of its interference is that people are
prevented from using their knowledge and abilities, their labor, and
their material means of production in the way in which they would
earn the highest returns and satisfy their needs as much as possible.
Such interference makes people poorer and less satisfied.
This is the crux of the matter. All the subtlety and hair-splitting
wasted in the effort to invalidate this fundamentai thesis are vain. On
the unhampered market there prevails an irresistible tendency to
employ every factor of production for the best possible satisfaction of

Restriction of Production

737

the most urgent needs of the consumers. If the government interferes
with this process, it can only impair satisfaction; it can never improve
it.
The correctness of this thesis has been proved in an excellent and
irrefutable manner with regard to the hjstorically most important
class of government interference with production, the barriers to
international trade. In this field the teachings of the classical economists, especially thosc of Ricardo, are final and settle the issue forever.
All that a tarifi can achieve is to divert production from those locations in which the output per unit of input is higher to locations
in which it is lower. It does not increase production; it curtails it.
People expatiate on alleged government encouragement of production. Howcvcr, government does not have the power to encourage
one branch of production except by curtailing other branches. It withdraws the factors of production from thosc branches in which the unhampered market would employ them and directs them into other
branches. It little matters what kind of administrative procedures the
government resorts to for the realization of this effect. It may subsidize openly or disguise the mbsidy in enacting tariffs and thus forcing
its subjects to defray the costs. What alone counts is the fact that
people are forced to forego some satisfactions which they value more
highly1 and are compensated only by satisfactions which they value
less. ;lt the bottom of the interventionist argument there is always
the idea that the government or the state is an entity outside and above
the social process of production, that it owns somkhing which is not
derived from taxing its subjects, and that it can spend this mythical
something for definite purposes. This is the Santa Claus fable raised
by Lord Keynes to the dignity of an economic doctrine and enthusiastically endorsed by all thosc who expect personal advantage from
government spending. As against these popular fallacies there is need
to emphasize the truism that a government can spend or invest only
what it takes away from its citizens and that its additional spending
and investment curtails the citizens' spending and investment to the
full extent of its quantity.
While government has no power to make people more prosperous
by interference with business, it certainly does have the power to
make them less satisfied by restriction of production.

r . The Prize of Restriction
The fact that restricting production invariably involves a curtailment of the individual citizens' satisfaction does not mean that such

Human Action
738
restriction is necessarily to be regarded as a damage. A government
does not wantonly resort to restrictive measures. It wants to attain
certain ends and considers the restriction as the appropriate means for
the realization of its plan. The appraisal of restrictive policies depends
therefore on thc answer to two questions: Is the mcans chosen by the
government fitted to attain the end sought? Is the realization of this
end a compensation for the individual citizens' privation? In raising
these questions we look upon restriction of production as we look
upon taxes. Payment of taxes also directly curtails the taxpayer's
satisfaction. But it is the price he pays for the services which government renders to society and to each of its mcmbers. As far as the
government fulfills its social functions and the taxes do not exceed
the amount required for securing the smooth operation of the government apparatus, they arc necessary costs and repay themselves.
The adequacy of this mode of dealing with restrictive measures is
especially manifest in all those cases in which restriction is resorted
to as a substitute for taxation. The bulk of expenditure for national
defcnse is defrayed by the treasury out of the public revenue. But
occasionally another procedure is chosen. It happens sometimes that
the nation's preparedness t o repel aggression depends on the existence
of certain branches of industry which would be absent in the unhampered market. These industries must be subsidized, and the subsidies granted are to be considered as any other armaments expenditure.
Their character remains the same if the government grants them indirectly by the imposition of an import duty for the products concerned. The difference is only that then the consumers are directly
burdened with the costs incuired, while in the case of a government
subsidy they defray these costs indirectly in paying higher taxes.
In enacting restrictive measures governments and parliaments have
hardly ever been aware of the consequences of their meddling with
business. Thus, they have blithely assumed that protective tariffs are
capable of raising the nation's standard of living, and they have
stohhardy r e f ~ s e dts a d ~ i t
the correcmess of the ezoiiomic teachings concerning the effects of protectionism. The economists' condemnation of protectionism is irrefutable and free of any party bias.
For the economists do not say that protection is bad from any preconceived point of view. They show that protection cannot attain those
ends which the governments as a rule want to attain by resorting to it.
Thcy do not question the ultimate end of the government's action;
they nlerely reject the means chosen as inappropriate to realize the
ends aimed at.
Most popular among all restrictive measures are those styled pro-

Restriction of Production

739

labor legislation. Here too the governments and public opinion badly
misjudge the effects. They believe that restricting the hours of work
and prohibiting child labor exclusively burdens the employers and
is a "social gain" for the wage earners. However, this is true only
to the extent that such laws reduce the supply of labor and thus raise
the marginal productivity of labor as against the marginal productivity of capital. But the drop in the supply of labor results also in a
decrease in the total amount of goods produced and thereby in the
average per capita consumption. The total cake shrinks, but the portion of the smaller cake which goes to the wage earners is proportionately higher than what they received from the bigger cake; concomitantly the portion of the capitalists drops1 It depends on the
concrete data of each case whether or not this outcome improves or
impairs the real wage rates of the various groups of wage earners.
The popular appraisal of prolabor legislation was based on the
error that wage rates have no causal relation whatever to the value
that the worker's labor adds to the material. Wage rates, says the "iron
law," are determined by the minimum amount of indispensable neccssities of life; they can never rise above the subsistence level. The difference between the value produced by the worker and the wages paid
to him goes to the exploiting employer. If this surplus is curtailed by
restricting the working hours, the wage earner is relieved of a part
of his toil and trouble, his wages remain unchanged, and the employer
is deprived of a part of his unfair profit. T h e restriction of total output
curtails only the income of the exploiting bourgeois.
It has been pointed out already that the role which prolabor legislation pIayed in the evolution of Western capitalism was until a few
years ago much less important than would be suggested by the vehemence with which the problems involved have been publicly discussed. Labor legislation, for the most part, merely provided a legal
recognition of changes in conditions already co~surnmatedby the
rapid evolution of b~siness.~
But in the coun&es which were slow in
adopting capitalistic modes of production and are backward in developing modern methods of processing and manufacturing, the
problem of labor legislation is crucial. Deluded by the spurious doctrines of interventionism, the politicians of these nations believe that
they can improve the lot of the destitute masses by copying the labor
legislation of the most advanced capitaIistic countries. They look upon
I . Entrepreneurial profits and losses are riot affected by prolabor legislation as
they entirely depend on the more or less successful adjustment of production to
the changing conditions of the market. With regard to these, labor legislation
counts only as a factor producing change.
2. Cf. above, pp. 610-612.

740
Human Actiorz
the problems involved as if they were merely to be treated from what
is erroneously called the "human angle" and fail t o recognize the
real issue.
It is a sad fact indeed that in Asia many millions of tender children
are destitute and starving, that wages arc extremely low when compared with American or Western European standards, that hours of
work are long, and that sanitary conditions in the workshops are
deplorable. 13ut there is no means of eliminating these evils other than
to work, t o produce, and t o save tnore and thus to accumulate more
capital. This is indispensable for any lasting improvement. T h e restrictive measures advocated b y self-styled philanthropists and humanitarians would be futile. T h e y would not only fail to improve
conditions, they would make things a good deal worse. If the parents
are too poor t o feed their children adequately, prohibition of child
labor condemns the children to starvation. If the marginal productivity
of labor is so low that a worker can only earn in ten hours wages which
are substandard when compared with American wages, one does not
benefit the laborer b y decreeing the eight-hour day.
T h e problem under discussion is not the desirability of improving
the wage earners' material well-being. T h c advocates of what are
miscalled prolabor laws intentionally confuse the issue in repeating
again and again that more leisure, higher real wages, and freeing
children and married women from the necessity of seeking jobs would
make the families of the workers happier. T h e y resort to falsehood and
mean calumny in calling those who oppose such laws as detrimental
to the vital interests of the wage earners "labor-baiters" and "enemies
of labor." T h e disagreement does not refer to the ends sought; it concerns solely the means to be applied for their realization. T h e question
is not whether or not improvement of the masses' welfare is desirable.
It is cxclusivcly whether o r not government decrees restricting the
hours of work and the employment of women and children are the
right means for raising the workers' standard of living. This is a purely
cataiiactic probiem t o be soived b y economm. Emotionai taik is
beside the point. It is a poor disguise for the fact that these selfrighteous advocates of restriction are unable to advance any tenable
objections to the economists' well-founded argumentation.
T h e fact that the standard of living of the average American worker
is incomparably more satisfactory than that of the average Chinese
worker, that in the Cnited States hours of work are shorter and that
the children are sent to school and not t o the factories, is not an
achievement of the government and of the laws of the country. I t is
the outcome of the fact that the capital invested per head of the em-

Restriction of Production

741

ployees is much greater than in China and that consequently the
marginal productivity of labor is much higher. This is not the merit
of "social policies"; it is the result of the laissez faire methods of the
past which abstained from sabotaging the evolution of capitalism. It
is this laissez faire that the Asiatics must adopt if they want to improve
the lot of their peoples.
The poverty of Asia and other backward countries is due to :he
same causes which made conditions unsatisfactory in the early periods
of Western capitalism. While population figures increased rapidly,
restrictive policies delayed the adjustment of production methods to
the needs of the growing number of mouths. It is to the irnperishablc
credit of the laissez faire economists, whom the typical textbooks of
our universities dismiss as pessimists and apologists of the unfair greed
of exploiting bourgeois, that they paved the way for economic
freedom which raised the average standard of living to an unpreccdented height.
Economics is not dogmatic, as the self-styled "unorthodox" advocates of government omnipotence and totalitarian dictatorship contend. Economics neither approves nor disapproves of government
measures restricting production and output. It merely considers it
its duty to clarify the consequences of such measures. The choice
of policies to be adopted devolves upon the people. But in choosing
they must not disregard the teachings of economics if they want to
attain the ends sought.
There are certainly cases in which people may consider definite
restrictive measures as justified. Regulations concerning fire prevention are restrictive and raise the cost of production. Rut the curtailment of total output they bring about is the price to be paid for avoidance of greater disaster. The decision about each restrictive measure
is to be made on the ground of a meticulous weighing of the costs
to be incurred and the prize to be obtained. N o reasonable man could
possibly question this rule.

3. Restriction as a Privilege
Every disarrangement of the market data affects various individuals
and groups of individuals in a different way. For some people it is a
boon, for others a blow. Only after a while, when production is adjusted to the emergence of the new datum, are these effects exhausted.
Thus a restrictive measure, while placing the immense majority at a
disadvantage, may temporarily improve some people's position. For
those favored the measure is tantamount to the acquisition of a

742
Human Action
privilege. They are asking for such measures because they want to be
privileged.
Here again the most striking example is provided by protectionism.
The imposition of a duty on the importation of a commodity burdens
the consumers. But to the domestic producers it is a boon. From their
point of view decreeing new tariffs and raising already existing tariffs
is an excellent thing.
The same is valid with regard to many other restrictive measures.
If the government restricts--either by direct restriction or by fiscal
discrimination-big business and corporations, the competitive position of small-size enterprises is strengthened. If it restricts the operation of big stores and chain stores, the small shopkeepers rejoice.
It is important to realize that what those benefited by these measures
consider an advantage for themselves lasts only for a limited time. In
the long run the privilege accorded to a definite class of producers
loses its power to create specific gains. The privileged branch attracts
newcomers, and their con~petitiontends to eliminate the specific gains
derived from the privilege. Thus the eagerness of the law's pet children
to acquire privileges is insatiable. They continue to ask for new
privileges because the old ones lose their power.
On the other hand, the repeal of a restrictive measure to the existence of which the structure of production has already been adjusted
means a new disarrangement of the market data, favors the short-run
interests of some people and hurts the short-run interests of other
people. Let us illustrate the issue by referring to a tariff item. Ruritania
years ago, let us say in 1920, decreed a tariff on the importation of
leather. This was a boon for the enterprises which at the moment
happened to be engaged in the tanning industry. But then later the
size of the industry expanded and the windfall gains which the tanners
enjoyed in 1920 and in the following years petered out. What remains is merely the fact that a part of the world's leather production
is shifted from locations in which the output per unit of input is higher,
to locaticions in Ruritania in which production requires higher costs.
The residents of Ruritania pay higher prices for leather than they
would pay in the absence of the tariff. As a greater part of ~uritania's
capital and labor is employed in the tanneries than would be the case
under free trade for leather, some other domestic industries shrank or
were at least prevented from growing. Less leather is imported from
abroad and a smaller amount of Ruritanian products is exported as payment for leather imported. The volun~eof Ruritania's foreign trade is
curtailed. hTota single soul in the whole world derives any advantage
from the preservation of the old tariff. On the contrary, everyone is

Restriction of Production

743

hurt by the drop in the total output of mankind's industrial effort.
If the policy adopted by Ruritania with regard to leather were to be
adopted by all nations and with regard to every kind of merchandise
in the most rigid way so as to abolish international trade altogether
and to make every nation perfcctIy autarkic, all people wouId have to
forego entirely the advantages which the international division of
labor gives them.
It is obvious that the repeal of the Ruritanian tariff on leather must
in the long run benefit everybody, Ruritanians as well as foreigners.
However, in the short run it would hurt the interests of the capitalists
who have invested in Ruritanian tanneries. It would no less hurt the
short-run interests of the Ruritanian workers specialized in tannery
work. A part of them would have either to emigrate or t o change
their occupation. These capitalists and workers passionately fight all
attempts to lower the leather tariff or to abolish it altogether.
This shows clearly why it is politically extremely difiicult to brush
away measures restricting production once the structure of business
has been adjusted to their existence. Although their effects are pernicious to everybody, their disappearance is in the short run disadvantageous to special groups. These special groups intercsted in the
preservation of the restrictive measures are, of course, only minorities.
In Ruritania only the small fraction of the population engaged in the
tanneries can suffer from the abolition of the tariff on leather. The
immense majority are buyers of leather and leather goods and would
be benefited by a drop in their prices. Outside the boundaries of
Ruritania, only those people would be hurt who are engaged in
those industries which will shrink because the leather industry will
expand.
The last objection advanced by the opponents of free trade runs
this way: Granted that only those Ruritanians engaged in tanning
hides are immediately interested in the preservation of the tariff on
leather. But every Ruritanian belongs to one of the many branches
of production. If each domestic product is protected by the tariff,
the transition to free trade hurts the interests of each industry and
thereby those of all speciaIized groups of capital and labor the sum
of which is the whole nation. It follows that repealing the tariff would
in the short run be prejudicial to all citizens. And it is short-run interests
only that count.
This argument invoIves a threefold error. First, it is not true that
a11 branches of industry would be hurt by the transition to free trade.
On the contrary. Those branches in which the comparative costs of
production are lowest will expand under free trade. Their short-run

interests would be favored by the abolition of the tariff. The tariff
on those products they themselves turn out is of no advantage for
them, as they could not only survive, but expand under free trade.
The tariff on those products for which the comparative cost is higher
in Ruritania than abroad hurts them by directing capital and labor,
which otherwise would have fertilized them, into those other
branches.
Second, the short-run principle is entirely fallacious. In the short
run every change in the market data hurts those who did not anticipate
it in time. A consistent champion of the short-run principle must
advocate perfect rigidity and immutability of a11 data and oppose any
change, including any therapeutical and technological irnpr~vernent.~
If in acting people were always to prefer the avoidance of an evil in
the nearer future to the avoidance of an evil in the remoter future,
they would come down to the animal level. It is the very essence of
human action as distinct from animal behavior that it consciously renounces some tcmporally nearer satisfaction in order to reap some
greater but ternporalIy remoter satisfaction. Time preference is not
absolute with man; it is only one of the items entering into the weighing and balancing of pros and cons. Adan swallows hitter pills for thc
sake of beneficent effects to be reaped at a later date. Therc cannot be
any question of unconditionally preferring what is good in the short
run to what is good in the long run; the intensity of the satisfaction
expected from each of the alternatives must be taken into account
too.
Finally, if the problem of the abolition of Ruritania's comprehensive
tariff system is under discussion, one must not forget the fact that
the short-run interests of those engaged in tanning are hurt only by
the abolition of one of the items of the tariff while thcy are favored
by the abolition of thc other items concerning the products of the
industries in which comparative cost is high. It is true that wage rates
of the tannery workers will drop for some time as against those in
other branches and that some time will elapse until the appropriate
long-run proportion between wage rates in the various branches of
Ruritanian production will be established. But concornitantly with
the merely temporary drop in their earnings, these workers will experience a drop in the prices of many articles they are buying. And
this tendency toward an improvement in their conditions is not a
phenomenon only of the period of transition. It is the consummation
of the lasting blessings of free trade which, in shifting every branch
3. This consistency was displayed by some hTazi philosophers. Cf. Sombart,
A New Socia! Philosophy, pp. 242-245.

Restriction of Production

745

of industry to the location in which comparative cost is lowest, increases the productivity of labor and the total quantity of goods
produced. It is the lasting long-run boon which free trade secures to
every member of the market society.
The opposition to the abolition of tariff protection would be reasonable from the personal point of view of those engaged in the leather
industry if the tariff on leather were the onIy tariff. Then one could
explain their attitude as dictated by status interests, the interests of a
caste which would be temporarily hurt by the abolition of a privilege
although its mere preservation no longer confers any benefit on
them. But in this hypothetical case the opposition of the tanners would
be hopeless. The majority of the nation would overrule it. What
strengthens the ranks of the protectionists is the fact that the tariff on
leather is no exception, that many branches of industry are in a sirnilar
position and are fighting the abolition of tariff items concerning their
own branch. This is, of course, not an alliance based on each group's
special group interests. If everybody is protected to the same extent,
everybody not only loses as consumer as much as he gains as producer.
Everybody is harmed by the general drop in the productivity of labor
which the shifting of industries from more favorable to less favorable
locations brings about. Conversely the aboIition of all tariff items
would benefit everybody in the long run, while the short-run harm
which the abolition of some special tariff item brings to the special
interests of the group concerned is already in the short run at least
partly compensated by the consequences of the abolition of the tariff
on the products the members of this group are buying and consuming.
Many people look upon tariff protection as if it were a privilege
accorded to their nation's wage earners, procuring them, for the full
duration of its existence, a higher standard of living than they would
enjoy under free trade. This argument is advanced not only in thc
United States, but in every country in the world in which average
real wage rates are higher than in some other country.
Now, it is true that under perfect mobility of capital and labor
there would prevail all over the world a tendency toward an equalization of the price paid for labor of the same kind and quality.* Yet,
even if there were free trade for products, this tendency is absent in
our real worId of migration barriers and institutions hindering foreign
investment of capital. The marginal productivity of labor is higher
in the United States than it is in China because capital invested per head
of the working population is greater, and because Chinese workers are
prevented from moving to America and competing on the American
4. For a detailed analysis, cf. above, p. 623.

746
Human Action
labor market. There is no need, in dealing with the explanation of this
difference, to investigate whether natural resources are or are not
more abundant in America than in China and whether or not the
Chinese worker is racially inferior to the American worker. However
this may be, these facts, namely, the institutional checks upon the mobility of capital and labor, suffice to account for the absence of the
equalization tendency. As the abolition of the American tariff could
not affect these two facts, it could not impair the standard of living
of the A~nericanwage earner in an adverse sense.
On the contrary. Given a state of affairs in which the mobility of
capital and labor is restricted, the transition to free trade for products
must necessarily raisc the American standard of life. Those industries
in which American costs are higher (American productivity is lower)
would shrink and those in which costs are lower (productivity is
higher) would expand.
It is certainly true that wage rates in Swiss watchmaking and in
Chinese embroidering are low when compared with wage rates in
the competing American industries. Under free trade the Swiss and
the Chinese would expand their sales on the American market and the
sales of their American competitors would shrink. But this is only
a part of the conseqllences of free trade. Selling and producing more,
the Swiss and Chinese would earn and buy more. It does not matter
whether they themselves buy more of the products of other American
industries or whether they increase their domestic purchases and those
in other countries, for instance, in France. Whatever happens, the
equivaIent of the additional dollars they earned must finally go to the
United States and increase the sales of some American industries. If the
Swiss and Chinese do not give away their products as a gift, they must
spend these dollars in buying.
The popular opinion to the contrary is due to the illusory idea that
America could expand its purchases of imported products by reducing
the total sum of its citizens' cash holdings. This is the notorious fallacy
according to whirh pcnple buy withol~tr e g d to the size of thcir
cash holdings, and according to which the very existence of cash
holdings is simply the outcome of the fact that something is left over
because there is nothing more to buy. W e have already shown whv
this Mercantilist doctrine is entirely wrong.5
What the tariff really brings about in the field of wage rates and
the wage earners' standard of living is something quite different.
In a world in which there is free trade for commodities, while the
migration of workers and foreign investment are restricted, there pre5. See above, pp. 445-449.

Restriction of Production

747

vails a tendency toward an establishment of a definite relation between
the wages paid for the same kind and quality of labor in various
countries. There cannot prevail a tendency toward an equalization
of wage rates. But the final price to be paid for labor in various
countries is in a certain numerical relation. This final price is characterized by the fact that all those eager to earn wages get a job and all
those eager to employ workers are able to hire as many hands as they
want. There is "full employment."
Let us assume that there are two countries only-Ruritania and
Mauretania. In Ruritania the final wage rate is double what it is in
Mauretania. Now the government of Ruritania resorts to one of those
measures which are erroneously styled "prolabor." It burdens the
employers with an additional expenditure the si7.e of which is proportional to the number of workers employed. For example, it reduces
the hours of work without ~ermittinga corresponding drop in weekly
wage rates. The result is a drop in the quantity of goods produced and
a rise in the price of the unit: of every good. The individuaI worker
enjoys more leisure, but his standard of living is curtailed. What else
could a general decrease in the quantity of goods availablc bring
about?
This outcome is an internal event in Ruritania. It would emerge also
in the absence of any foreign trade. The fact that Ruritania is not
autarkic, but buys from and sells to Mauretania, does not alter its
essential features. But it implicates Mauretania. As the Ruritanians
produce and consume less, they will buy less from Mauretania. In
Mauretania there will not be a general drop in production. But some
industries which produced for export to Ruritania will henceforth
have to produce for the domestic Mauretanian marltct. Mauretania
will see the volume of its foreign trade drop; it will become, willy-nilly
more autarkic. This is a blessing in the eyes of the protectionists. In
truth, it means deterioration in the standard of living; production at
higher costs is substituted for that at lower costs. What Mauretania
experiences is the same thing that the residents of an autarkic country
would experience if an act of God were to curtail the productivity of
onc of the country's industries. As far as there is division of labor,
everybody is affected by a drop in the amount other people contribute
to supplying the market.
However, these inexorable final international conscquences of
Ruritania's new pro-labor law will not affect the various branches of
Mauretania7sindustry in the same way. A sequence of steps is needed
in both countries until at last a perfect adjustment of production to
the new state of data is brought about. These short-run effects are

748

Human Action

different from the long-run effects. They are more spectacular than
the long-run effects. While hardly anybody can fail to notice the
short-run effects, the long-run effects are recognized only by economists. While it is not difficult to conceal the long-run effects from
the public, something must be done about the easily recognizable
short-run effects lest the enthusiasm for such allcgcdly pro-labor
legislation fade away.
T h e first short-run effect to appear is the weakening of the competitive power of some Ruritanian branches of production as against those
of Mauretania. As prices rise in Ruritania, it becomes possible for
some Maurctanians to cxpand their sales in Ruritania. This is a temporary effect only; in the end the total sales of all Mauretanian industries
in Ruritania will drop. I t is possible that in spite of this general drop
in the total amount of Mauretanian exports to Ruritania, some of the
Mauretanian industries will expand their sales in the long run. (This
dcpcnds on the new configuration of comparative costs.) But there is
no necessary interconnection between these short-run and long-run
effects. T h e adjustments of the period of transition create kaleidoscopically changing situations which may differ entirely from the final outcome. Yet the short-sighted public's attcntion is cornpletcly absorbed
by these short-run effects. 'They hear the businessmen effcctcd cornpiah that the new Ruritanian law gives to Mauretanians the opportunity to undersell both in Ruritania and in Mauretania. They see that
some Ruritanian businessmen are forced to restrict their production
and to dischargc workers. And they begin to suspect that something
may be wrong with the teachings of the self-styled "unorthodox
friends of labor."
But the picture is different if there is in Ruritania a tariff high
enough to prevent Mauretanians from even temporarily expanding
their sales on the Ruritanian market. Then the most spectacular shortrun effects of the new measure are masked in such a way that the
public does not become aware of them. T h e long-run effects, of
n r \ ~ x r c a nnnnnc

L V L I A ~ ~ , LauuuL

,.

h
a n - 7 r x : , l - r l R.,c C
L , ~,
,
,.I
LC ~L
,l.,.,c
L.,
.
.,.l+,,a, l l u L u c 1
U L a v u I u L u . ULIL
LJIL
dlc LJLULI~LIL
J I J U L LJ)

sequence of short-run effects which is less offensive because ~Essvisible.
The talk about alleged "social gains" produced by the shortening of
the hours of work is not exploded b y the immehiate emergence of
effects which everyone, and most of all the discharged workers, consider undesirable.
T h e main function of tariffs and other protectionist devices today is
to disguise the real effects of interventionist policies designcd to raise
the standard of living of the masses. Economic nationalism is the
necessary complement of these popular policies which pretend to

Restriction of Productio~z

749

improve the wage earners' material well-being while they are in fact
impairing itnG

4. Restriction as an Econon~icSystem
There are, as has been shown, cases in which a restrictive measure
can attain the end sought by its application. If those resorting to such
a measure think that the attainment of this goal is more important
than the disadvantages brought about by the restriction-i.e., the
curtailment in the quantity of material goods available for consumption-the recourse to restriction is justified from the point of view
of their value judgments. They incur costs and pay a price in ordcr
to get something that they value more than what they had to expend
or to forego. Nobody, and certainly not the theorist, is in a position
to argue with them about the propriety of their value judgments.
The only adequate mode of dealing with measures restricting pro.
duction is to look at them as sacrifices made for the attainment of a
definite end. They are quasi-expenditures and quasi-consumption.
They are an employment of things that could be produced and consumed in one way for the realization of certain other ends. These
things are prevented from coming into existence, but this quasiconsumption is precisely what satisfies the authors of these measures
better than the increase in goods available which the omission of the
restriction would have produced.
With certain restrictive measures this point of view is universally
adopted. If a government decrees that a piece of land should be kept
in its natural state as a national park and should be withheld from any
other utilization, nobody would classify such a venture as anything
else than an expenditure. The government deprives the citizens of
the increment in various products which the cultivation of this land
could bring about, in ordcr to provide them with another satisfaction.
it ioiiows h a t restricrion of production can never piay any roie
other than that of an ancillary complement of a system of production.
One cannot construct a system of economic action out of such restrictive measures alone. No complex of such measures can be linked
together into an integrated economic system. They cannot form a
system of production. They belong in the sphere of consumption, not
in the sphere of production.
In scrutinizing the problems of interventionism w-e are intent upon
examining the claims of the advocates of government interference with
6. See also what has been said about the function of cartels on pp. 362-366.

7 So
Human Action
business that their system offers an alternative to other economic
systems. No such claim can reasonably be raised with regard to
measures restricting production. The best they can attain is curtailment of output and satisfaction. Wealth is produced by expending
a certain quantity of factors of production. Curtailing this quantity
does not increase, but decreases, the amount of goods produced. Even
if the ends aimed at by shortening the hours of work could be attained
by such a decree, it would not be a measure of production. It is invariably a way of cutting down output.
Capitalism is a system of social production. Socialism, say the socialists, is also a system of social production. But with regard to measures
restricting production, even the interventionists cannQt raise a similar
claim. They can only say that under capitalism too much is produced
and that they want to prevent the production of this surplus in order
to realize other ends. They themselves must confess that there are
limits to the application of restriction.
Economics does not contend that restriction is a bad system of production. It asserts that it is not a system of production, at all, but rather
a system of quasi-consumption, Most of the ends the interventionists
want to attain by restriction cannot be attained this way. But even
where restrictive measures are fit to attain the ends sought, they are
only restrictive.?
The enormous popularity which restriction enjoys in our day is
due to the fact that people do not recognize its consequences. In dealing with the problem of shortening the hours of work by government
decree, the public is not aware of the fact that total output must drop
and that it is very probable that the wage earners' standard of living
will be potentially lowered too. It is a dogma of present-day "unorthodoxy" that such a "prolabor" measure is a "social gain" for the
workers and that the costs of these gains fall entirely upon the employers. Whoever questions this dogma is branded as a "sycophantic"
apologist of the unfair pretensions of rugged exploiters, and pitilessly
persecuted. I t is insinuated that he wants to reduce the wage earners
to the poverty and the long working hours of the early stages of
modern industrialism.
As against all this slander it is important to emphasize again that
what produces wealth and well-being is production and not restriction. That in the capitalist countries the average wage earner consumes
more goods and can afford to enjoy more leisure than his ancestors,
and that he can support his wife and children and need not send them
7. As for the objections raised against this thesis from the point of view of the
Ricardo effect, see beIow, pp. 767-770.

Restriction of Production

751

to work, is not an achievement of governments and labor unions. It
is the outcome of the fact that profit-seeking business has accumulated
and invested more capital and thus increased a thousandfold the
productivity of labor.

XXX. INTERFERENCE W I T H T H E STRTJCTURE
OF PRICES
I.

T h e Govcrnrnent and the Autonomy of the Market

~RFERENCEwith the structure of the market means that the
authority aims at fixing prices for commodities and services and
interest rates at a height different from what the unhampered ~narket
would have determined. It decrees, or empowers--either tacitly or
expressly--definite groups of people to decree, prices and rates which
are t o be considered either as maxima or as minima, and it provides for
the enforcement of such decrees by coercion and compulsion.
In resorting to such measurcs the government wants to favor either
the buyer-as in the case of maximum prices-or the seller-as in
the case of minimum prices. The maximum price is designed to niakc
it possible for the buyer to procure what he wants at a price lower than
that of the unhampered market. The minimum price is designed to
make it possiblc for the seller to disposc of his merchandise or his
services at a price higher than that of the unhampered market. It
depends on the political balance of forces which groups the authority
wants to favor. At times governments have resorted to maximum
prices, at other times to minimum prices for various commodities. At
times they have decreed maximum wage rates, at other times minimum
wage rates. It is only with regard to intcrcst that they have nevcr had
recourse to minimum rates; when they have interfered, they have always decreed maximum interest rates. They have always looked
askance upon saving, investing, and moneylending.
11 *I-::-&-A
---- - - -LL u l a ILILCLLCICIILC wlih cummodity pices, wage rates, and interest
rates includes all prices, wage rates, and interest rates, it is tantamount
to the fulI substitution of socialism (of the German pattern) for the
market economy. Then the market, interpersonal exchange, private
ownership of the means of production, entrepreneurship, and private
initiative, virtually disappear altogether. No individual any longer has
the opportunity to influence the process of production of his own
accord; every individual is bound to obey the orders of the supreme
board of production management. What in the complex of these
orders are called prices, wage rates, and interest rates are no longer

I"'"

:&

Interference with the Strncture of Prices

753
prices, wage rates, and interest rates in the catallactic sense of these
terms. They are merely quantitative determinations fixed by the
director without reference to a market process. If the governments
resorting to pricc control and the reformers advocating pricc control
were always intent upon the establishment of socialism of the German
pattern, there would be no need for economics to deal with rice control separately. All that has to be said with reference to such price
control is already contained in the analysis of sociaIism.
Many advocates of government interference with prices have been
and are very much confused with regard to this issue. They have
failed to recognize the fundamental difference between a market
economy and a nonmarket society. The haziness of their ideas has
been reflected in vague and ambiguous language and in a bewildered
terminology. They have tried to amalgamate things entirely incornpatible with one another. Their main concepts arc examples of the
inconsistency which logicians call contradictio in adjecto.
However, there were and are advocates of price control who have
openly declared that they want to preserve the market economy.
They are outspoken in their assertion that govcrnment fixing of prices,
wage rates, and intercst rates can attain the ends the govcrnment wants
to attain by their promulgation without abolishing altogether the
market and private ownership of the means of production. They even
declare that price control is the best or the only means of preserving
the system of private enterprise and of preventing the coming of
socialism. They become very indignant if somebody questions the
correctness of their doctrine and shows that price control, if it is
not to make things worse from the point of view of the governments
and the intervcntionist doctrinaires, must finally result in socialism.
They protest that they are neither socialists nor communists, and that
they aim at economic freedom and not at totalitarianism.
It is the tenets of these iilterventionists that we havc to examine.
T h e problem is whcther it is possible for the police power to attain
the ends it wants to attain by fixing prices, wage rates, and interest
rates at a height different from what the unhampered matket would
have determined. It is beyond doubt that a strong and resolute government has the power to decree such maximum or ~ninimumrates and to
take revenge upon the disobedient. But the question is whcther or
not the authority can attain those ends which it wants to attain by resorting to such decrees.
History is a long record of price ceilings and anti-usury laws.
Again and again emperors, kings, and revolutionary dictators have
tried to meddle with the market phenomena. Severe punishment was

754

Huiwan Action

inflicted on refractory dealers and farmers. Many people fell victim
to persecutions whidh met with the enthusiastic approd of the
masscs. Nonetheless, all these endeavors failed. The explanation which
thc writings of lawyers, theologians, and philosophers provided for
the failure was in full agreement with the ideas held by the rulers and
the nlasses. Man, they said, is intrinsically selfish and sinful, and thc
authorities were unfdrtunately too lax in enforcing the law. What was
needed was more firmness and peremptoriness on the part of those in
power.
Cognizance of the issue involved was first reached with regard to
a special problem. Various governments long practiced currency debasement. Thcy substituted baser and cheaper metals for a part of the
gold or silver which the coins previously contained, or they reduced
thc weight and the size of the coins. But they retained for the debased
coins the customary names of the old ones and decreed that they
should be given and received at the nominal par. Then iater the
governments tried to enjoin on their subjects analogous constraint with
regard to the exchange ratio between gold and silver and that between
metallic money and credit money or fiat money. In searching for the
causes which made all such dccrces abortive, the forerunners of
economic thought had already discovered by the last centuries of the
Middle Ages the regularity which was later called Gresham's Law.
There was still a long way to go from this isolated insight to the point
where the philosophers of the eighteenth century became aware of
the interconnectedness of all market phenomena.
In describing the results of their reasoning the classical economists
and their successors sometimes resorted to idiomatic expressions which
could easily be misinterpreted by those who wanted to misinterpret
them. They occasionally spoke of the "impossibility" of price control.
What they rcally meant was not that such decrees are impossible, but
that they cannot attain those ends which the governments are trying
to attain and that they make things worse, not better. They concluded
that such decrees are contrary to purpose and inexpedient.
It is necessary to see clearly that the problem of price control is
not merely one of the problems to be dealt with by economics, not
a problem with regard to which there can arise disagreement among
various economists. The issue involved is rather: Is there any such
thing as economics? Is there any regularity in the sequence and interconnectedness of the market phenomena? He who answers these two
questions in the ncgative denies the very possibility, rationality, and
existence of economics as a branch of ltnowlcdge. H e returns to the
bclicfs held in the ages which preceded the evolution of economics.

interference with the S t r u c t u ~ eof Prices

755

H e declares to be untrue the assertion that there is any economic law
and that prices, wage rates, and interest rates are uniquely determined
by the data of the market. He contends that the police have the power
to determine these market phenomena ad libitum. An advocate of
socialjsm need not necessarily negate economics; his postulates do not
necessarily imply the indeterminateness of the market phenomena.
But the interventionist, in advocating price control, cannot help nullifying the very existence of economics. Nothing is left of economics
if one denies the law of the market.
The German Historical School was consistent in its radical condemnation of economics and in its endeavors to substitute wirtschaftliche Staatswissenschaften (the economic aspects of political science)
for economics. So were many adepts of British Fabianism and Am~rican Institutionalism. But those authors who do not totally reject
economics and yet assert that price control can attain the ends sought
lamentably contradict themselves. I t is logically impossible to reconcile the point of view of the econonlist and that of the interventionist.
If prices are uniquely determined by the market data, they cannot
be freely manipulated by government compulsion. The government's
decree is just a new datum, and its effects are determined by the operation of the market. It need not necessarily produce those results which
the govcrnrnent wants to realize in resorting to it. I t may happen that
the final outcome of the interference is, from the point of view of
the government's intention, even more undesirable than the previous
state of affairs which the government wanted to alter.
One does not invaIidate these propositions by putting the term
economic law in quotation marks and by finding fault with the notion
of the law. In speaking of the laws of nature we have in mind the
fact that there prevails an inexorable interconnectedness of physical
and biological phenomena and that acting man must submit to this
regularity if he wants to succeed. In speaking of the laws of human
action we refer to the fact that such an inexorable interconnectedness
of phenomena is present also in the field of human action as such and
that acting man must recognize this regularity too if he wants to succeed. T h e reality of the laws of praxeology is revealed to man by the
same signs that reveal the reality of natural law, namely, the fact that
his power to attain his ends is restricted and conditioned. In the absence
of laws man would either be omnipotent and would never feel any
uneasiness which he could not remove instantly and totally, or he
could not act at all.
These laws of the universe must not be confused with the man-made
laws of the country and with man-made moral precepts. The laws of

756
Hurnan Action
the universe about which physics, biology, and praxeology provide
knowledge are independent of the human will, they are primary ontological facts rigidly restricting man's power to act. The moial prccepts and the laws of the country are means by which men seek to
attain certain ends. Whether or not these ends can really be attained
this way depends on the laws of the universe. The man-made laws arc
suitable if they are fit to attain these ends and contrary to purpose
if they are not. They are open to examination from the point of view
of their suitableness or unsuitableness. With regard to the laws of the
universe any doubt of their suitableness is supererogatory and vain.
They are what they arc and take care of themselves. Their violation
penalizes itself. But the man-made laws need to be enforced by special
sanctions.
Only the insane venture to disregard physical and biological laws.
But it is quite common to disdain economic laws. Rulers do not like
to admit that their power is restricted by any laws other than those
of physics and biology. They never ascribe their failures and frustrations to the violation of economic law.
Foremost in the repudiation of economic knowledge was the German Historical School. It was an unbearable idea to these professors
that their lofty idols, the Hohenzollern Electors of Brandenburg and
Kings of Prussia, should have lacked ornnipotcnce. T o refute the
teachings of the economists, they buried themselves in old documents
and compiled numerous volumes dealing with the history of the administration of these glorious princes. This, they wrote, is a realistic
approach to thc problems of statc and government. Here you find
unadulterated facts and real life, not the bloodless abstractions and
faulty generalizations of the British doctrinaires. In truth, all that these
ponderous tomes report is a long record of policies and measures
which failed precisely because of their neglect of economic law. x~
more instructive case history could ever be written than these Actn
Rorussica.
Eowever, e c ~ m m i c sc=mr
accuiesce i:: mch exemi;!ifica;ioi;. It
1
must enter into a precise scrutiny of the mode in which the market
reacts to government interference with the price structure.
2.

T h e Market's Reaction t o Government Interference

The characteristic feature of the market price is that it equalizes
supply and demand. The size of the demand coincides with the size of
supply not onIy in the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating
economy. T h e notion of the plain state of rest as developed by the

Interference with the Structure of Prices

757

elementary theory of prices is a faithful description of what comes
to pass in the market at every instant. Any deviation of a market price
from the height at which supply and demand are equal is-in the unhampered market-self-liquidating.
But if the government fixes prices at a height different from what
the market would have fixed if left alone, this equilibrium of demand
and supply is disturbed. Then there are-with maximum prices-potential buyers who cannot buy although they are ready to pay the
price fixed by the authority, or even a higher price. Then there arewith minimum prices-potential sellers who cannot sell although they
are ready to sell at the price fixed by the authority, or even at a lower
price. The price can no longer segregate those potential buyers and
sellers who can buy or sell from those who cannot. A different
principle for rhe allocation of the goods and services concerned and
for the selection of those who are to receive portions of the supply
available necessarily comes into operation. It may be that only those
are in a position to buy who come first, or only those to whom particular circumstances (such as personal connections) assign a privileged
position, or only those ruthless fellows who chase away their rivals
by resorting to intimidation or violence. If the authority does not
want chance or violence to determine the allocation of the supply
available and conditions to become chaotic, it must itself regulate the
amount which each individuaI is permitted to buy. It must resort to
rationing."
But rationing does not affect the core of the issue. The allocation
of portions of the supply already produced and available to the various
individuals eager to obtain a quantity of the goods concerned is only
a secondary function of the market. Its primary function is the direction of production. It directs the employment of the factors of production into those channels in which they satisfy the most urgent
needs of the consumers. If the government's price ceiling refers only
to one consumers' good or to a limited amount of consumers' goods
while the prices of the complementary factors of production are left
free, production of the consumers1 goods concerned will drop. The
marginal producers will discontinue producing them lest they suffer
losses. The not absolutely specific factors of production will be employed to a greater extent for the production of other goods not
subject to price ceilings. A greater part of the absolutely specific
factors of production will remain unused than would have remained
I. For the sake of simplicity we deal in the further disquisitions of this section
only with maximum prices for commodities and in the next section only with
minimum wage rates. However, our statements are, mutatis mutandis, equally
valid for minimum prices for commodities and maximum wage rates.

758

Human Action

in the absence of price ceilings. There emerges a tendency to shift
production activities from the production of the goods affected by
the maximum prices into the production of other goods. This outcome is, however, manifestly contrary to the intentions of the government. In resorting to price ceilings the authority wanted to make the
commodities concerned more easily accessible to the consumers. It
considered precisely those commodities so vital that it singled them
out for a special measure in order to make it possible even for poor
people to be amply supplied with them. But the result of the government's interference is that production of these commodities drops
or stops altogether. It is a complete failure.
It would be vain for the government to try to remove these undesired consequences by decreeing maximum prices likewise for the
factors of production needed for the production of the consumers'
goods the prices of which it has fixed. Such a measure would be successful only if all factors of production required were absolutely
specific. As this can never be the case, the government must add to
its first measure, fixing the price of only one consumers' good below
the potential market price, more and more price ceilings, not only for
all other consumers' goods and for all material factors of production,
but no less for labor. It must compel every entrepreneur, capitalist,
and employee to continue producing at the prices, wage rates, and
interest rates which the government has fixed, to produce those
quantities which the government orders them to produce, and to sell
the products to those people-producers or consumers-whom the
government determines. If one branch of production were to be
exempt from this regimentation, capital and labor would flow into it;
production would be restricted precisely in those other-regimented
-branches which the government considered so important that it
interfered with the conduct of their affairs.
Economics does not say that isolated government interference with
the prices of only one commodity or a few commodities is unfair,
bad, o r unfeasibie. it says that such interference produces resuits
contrary to its purpose, that it makes conditions worse, not better,
from the point of view of the government and those backing ks interf erence. Before the government interfered, the goods concerned were,
in the eyes of the government, too dear. As a result of the maximum
price their supply dwindles or disappears altogether. The government
interfered because it considered these commodities especially vital,
necessary, indispensable. But its action curtailed the supply available.
It is therefore, from the point of view of the government, absurd and
nonsensical.

Interference with the Structure of Prices

7 59

If the government is unwilling to acquiesce in this undesired and
undesirable outcome and goes further and further, if it fixes the prices
of all goods and services of all orders and obliges a11 people to continue
producing and working at these prices and wage rates, it eliminates
the market altogether. Then the planned economy, socialism of the
German Zwangs~vimchaft pattern, is substituted for the market
economy. The consumers no longer direct production by their buying
and abstention from buying; the government alone directs it.
There are only two exceptions to the rule that maximum prices
restrict supply and thus bring about a state of affairs which is contrary
to the ai~nssought by their imposition. One refers to absolute rent,
the other t o monopoly prices.
The maximum price results in a restriction of supply because the
marginal producers suffer losses and must discontinue production.
T h e nonspecific factors of production are employed for the production of other products not subject to price ceilings. The utilization of
the absolutely specific factors of production shrinks. Under unhampered market conditions they would have been utilized up to the
limit determined by the absence of an opportunity to use the nonspecific among the complementary factors for the satisfaction of more
urgent wants. Now only a smaller part of the available supply of these
absolutely specific factors can be utilized; concomitantly that part of
the supply that remains unused increases. But if the supply of these absolutely specific factors is so scanty that under the prices of the unhampered market their total supply was utilized, a margin is given
within which the government's interference does not curtail the
supply of the product. The maximum price does not restrict production as long as it has not entirely absorbed the absolute rent of the
marginal supplier of the absolutely specific factor. But at any rate it
results in a discrepancy between the demand for and the supply of
the product.
Thus the amount by which the urban rent of a piece of land exceeds
the agricuiturai rent provides a margin in which rent control can
operate without restricting the supply of rental space. If the maximum
rents are graduated in such a way as never to take away from any
proprietor so much that he prefers to use the land for agriculture
rather than for the construction of buildings, they do not affect the
supply of apartments and business premises. However, they increase
the demand for such apartments and premises and thus create the
very shortage that the governments pretend to fight by their rent
ceilings. Whether or not the authorities resort to rationing the space
availabIe is catallacticalIy of minor importance. At any rate, their

760
Human Action
price ceilings do not abolish the catallactic phenomenon of the urban
rent. They merely transfer the rcnt from the landlord's income into
the tenant's income.
In practice, of course, governments resorting to rent restriction
never adjust their ceilings to these considerations. They either rigidly
freeze gross rents as they prevailed on the eve of their interference or
allow only a lirnited addition to these gross rents. As the proportion
between the two items included in the gross rent, urban rent proper
and price paid for thc utilization of the superstructure, varies according to the special circumstances of each dwelling, the effect of the
rent ceilings is also very different. In some cases the expropriation of
the owner to the benefit of the renter involves only a fraction of the
difference between the urban rcnt and the agricultural rent; in other
cases it far cxceeds this difference. But however this may be, the
rent restriction creates a housing shortage. It increases demand without
increasing supply.
If maximum rents are decreed not only for already available rental
spacc, but also for buildings still to be constructed, the construction
of new buildings is no longer remunerative. It either stops altogether
or slumps to a low level; the shortage is perpetuated. But even if rents
in new buildings are left free, construction of new buildings drops.
Prospective investors are deterred because they cake into account the
danger that the government will at a later date declare a new emergcncy and expropriate a part of their revenues in the same way as it
did with the old buildings.
The second exception refers to monopoly prices. The difference
between a monopoIy price and the competitive price of the commodity in question provides a margin in which maximum prices could
be enforced without defeating the ends sought by the government. If
the competitive pricc is p and the lowest among the possible monopoly
prices nz) a ceiling price of c, c being lower than m,would make it
disadvantageous for the seller to raisc the price above p. The maximum
price would reescabiish the competitive pricc and increase demand,
production, and the supply offered for sale. A dim cognizance of this
concatenation is at the bottom of some suggcstions asking for government interference in order to preserve co~npetitionand to make it
operate as beneficially as possible.
W e may for the sake of argument pass over the fact that all such
proposals are unrealistic with regard to all those instances of rnonopoly
prices which are the outcome of government interference. If the
government objccts to monopoly prices for ncw inventions, it should
stop granting patents, It would be absurd to grant patents and then

Interference with the Stmcture of Prices

761

to deprive them of any value b y forcing the patentee to sell at the
competitive price. If the government does not approve of cartels,
i t should rather abstain from all measures (such as import duties)
which provide business with the opportunity to erect combines.
Things arc ditferent in those instances in which monopoly prices
come into existence without assistance from the governments. Here
governmental maximum priccs could reestablish competitive conditions if it were possible to find out by academic computation at which
height a nonexisting competitive marlict would have determined the
price. T h a t all endeavors to construct normarket prices are vain has
heen shown.' T h e unsatisfactory results of all attempts to determine
urhat the fair or correct price for the services of public utilities should
be are well known to all experts.
Reference to these two exceptions explains why in some rare cases
maximum prices, when applied with very great caution within a narI-owmargin, do not restrict thc supply of the oornmodity or the service
concerned. It does not affect the correctness of the general rule that
maximum prices bring about a state of affairs which, from the point
of view of the government decreeing them, is more undesirable than
conditions as they would have been in the abscnce of price control.

Observations on the Causes of the Decline of Ancient Civilization
Knowledge of the effects of government interference with market prices
makes us comprehend the economic causes of a momentous historical
event, the decline of ancient civilization.
It may be Ieft undecided whether or not it is correct to call the economic
organization of the Roman Empire capitalism. At any rate it is certain
that the Roman Empire in the second century, the age of the Antonines,
the "good" emperors, had reachcd a high stage of the social division of
labor and of interregional commerce. Several metropolitan centers, a
considerable number of middle-sized towns, and many small towns were
the seats of a refined civilization. The inhabitants of these urban agglomerations were supplied with food and raw materials not onIy from the
neighboring rural districts, but also from distant provinces. A part of
these provisions flowed into the cities as revenue of their wealthy residents
who owned landed property. But a considerable part u7as bought in exchange for the rural population's purchases of the products of the citydwellers' processing activities. There was an extensive trade between the
various regions of the vast empire. Not only in the processing industries,
but also in agricuiture there was a tendency toward further specialization.
The various parts of the empire were no longer econon~icallyself-sufficient. They were mutually interdependent.
What brought about the decline of the empire and the decay of its
2 . Cf. above, pp. 392-394.

762

Human Action

civilization was the disintegration of this econonlic interconnectedness,
not the barbarian invasions. The alien aggressors merely took advantage
of an opportunity which the internal weakness of the empire offered to
them. From a military point of view the tribes which invaded the empire
in the fourth and fifth centuries were not more formidable than the
armies which the legions had easily defeated in earlier times. But the
empire had changed. Its economic and social structure was already
medieval.
T h e freedom that Rome granted to commerce and trade had always
been restricted. With regard to the marketing of cereals and other vital
necessities it was even more restricted than with regard to other commodities. It was deemed unfair and immoral to ask for grain, oil, and wine, the
staples of these ages, more than the customary prices, and the municipal
authorities were quick to check what they considered profiteering. Thus
the evolution of an eficient wholesale trade in these commodities was prevented. The policy of the annonn, which was tantamount to a nationalization or municipalization qf the grain trade, aimed at filling the gaps. But
its effects were rather unsatisfactory. Grain was scarce in the urban agglomerations, and the agriculturists complained about the unremunerativeness of grain g r o ~ i n g . ~
The interference of the authorities upset the adjustment of supply to the rising demand.
T h e showdown came when in the political troubles of the third and
fourth centuries the emperors resorted to currency debasement. With
the system of maximum prices the practice of debasement completely
paralyzed both the production and the marketing of the vital foodstuffs
and disintegrated society's economic organization. The more eagerness the
authorities displayed in enforcing the maximum prices, the more desperate
became the conditions of the urban masses dependent on the purchase of
food. Commerce in grain and other necessities vanished altogether. T o
avoid starving, people deserted the cities, settled on the countryside, and
tried to grow grain, oil, wine, and other necessities for thcmselvcs. On the
other hand, the owners of the big estates restricted their excess production
of cereals and began to produce in their farmhouses-the villae-the products of handicraft which they needed. For their big-scale farming, which
was already serio~lslyjeopardized hecause of the Inefficiency of slave
labor, lost its rationality completely when the opportunity to sell at remunerative prices disappeared. As the owner of the estate could no longer
seIl in the cities, he could no longer patronize the urban artisans either.
He was forced to look for a substitute to meet his needs by employing
handicraftsmen on his own account in his villa. He discontinued big-scale
farming and became a landlord receiving rents from tenants or sharecroppers. These coloni were either freed slaves or urban proletarians who
settled in the villages and turned to tilling the soil. A tendency toward the
establishment of autarky of each landlord's estate emerged. The cconomic
3. Cf. Rostovtzeff, The Social and Economic History of the Ronzan Empire
(Oxford, 1926), p. 187.

Interference w i t h the Structure of Prices

763

function of the cities, of commerce, trade, and urban handicrafts, shrank.
Italy and the provinces of the empire returned to a less advanced state of
the social division of labor. The highly developed economic structure of
ancient civilization retrograded to what is now known as the manorial
organization of the Middle Ages.
The emperors were alarmed with that outcome, which undermined the
financial and military power of their government. But their counteraction
was futile as it did not affect the root of the evil. The compulsion and
coercion to which they resorted could not reverse the trend toward social
disintegration which, on the contrary, was caused precisely by too much
compulsion and coercion. No Roman was aware of the fact that the process
was induccd by the government's interference with prices and by currency debasement. It was vain for the emperors to promulgate laws
against the city-dweller who "relicta chitate rus habitare maluerit." The
system of the leiturgia, the public services to be rendered by the wealthy
citizens, only accelerated the retrogression of the division of labor. The
laws concerning the special obligations of the shipowners, the navicularii,
were no more successful in checking the decline of navigation than thc
laws concerning grain dealing in checking the shrinkage in the cities'
supply of agricultural products.
The marvelous civilization of antiquity perished because it did not adjust
its moral code and its legal system to the requirements of the market
economy. A social order is doomed if the actions which its normal functioning rcquires are rejected by the standards of morality, are dedared
iI1egal by the laws of the country, and are prosecuted as criminal by the
courts and the police. The Roman Etnpire crumbled to dust because it
lacked the spirit of liberalism and free enterprise. The policy of interventionism and its political corollary, the Fiihrer principle, decomposed the
mighty empire as they will by necessity always disintegrate and destroy
any social entity.

3. Minimum W a g e Rates
T h e very essence of the interventionist politicians' wisdom is t o
raise the price of labor either b y government decree or b\; violent
action on the part of labor unions. T o raise wage rates above the
height at which the unhampered market would determine them is
considered a postulate of the eternal laws of morality as well as indispensable from the economic point of view. ~ h o e ; e r dares to challenge this ethicaI and economic dogma is scorned both as depraved
and ignorant. Man\; of our contemporaries look upon people who
are foolhardy cnouih "to cross a picket line" as primitive tribesmen
looked upon those who violated the precepts of taboo conceptions.
Millions are jubilant if such scabs receive their well-dcscrvccl punish4. Corpus Juris Civilis, 1. un. C. X. 37.

764
Human Action
ment from the hands of the strikers while the police, the public
attorneys, and the penal courts preserve a lofty neutrality.
T h e market wage rate tends toward a height at which all those eager
to earn wages get jobs and all those eager t o employ workers can hire
as many as they want. It tends toward the cstablishnlent of what is
nowadays called full employment. Whcrc there is neither government nor union interfercncc with the lal~ormarket, there is only
voluntary or catallactic unemployment. But as soon as external pressure and cornpulsion, be i t on the part of the government or on the
part of the unions, tries to fix wage rates at a higher point, institutional
unemployment emerges. While there prcvails on the unhampered
labor market a tcndcncy for catallactic unemployment to disappear,
institutional unemployment cannot disappear as long as the government or the unions arc successful in the enforcement of their fiat.
If the minimum wage rate refers only to a part of the various occupations while other sectors of the labor market arc left free, those
losing thcir jobs on its account enter the free branches of business
and increase the supply of labor in them. W h e n unionism was restricted to skilled labop mainly, the wage rise achieved b y the unions
did not lead to institutional unemployment. It merely lowered the
height of wage rates in those branches in which there were no efficient
unions or no unions at all. 'The corollary of the rise in wages for organized workers was a drop in wages for unorganized workers. But
with the spread of govcrnment intcrfcrcnce with wages and with
government support of unionism, conditions have changed. Institutional unenlployment has become a chronic or permanent mass
phenomcnon.
Writing in 1930. T,ord Beveridge, now an enthusiastic advocate of
government and union mccldling with the labor market, pointed out
that the potential effect of "a high-wages policy" in causing unempIoyment is "not dcnied b y any competent authority." "n fact, t o
denv this cffcct is tantamount to a complete disavowal of any regularity ;n the sequence and interconnectcdncss of market phenomena.
Those earlier economists who sympathized with the unions were fully
aware of the fact that unionization can achieve its ends only when
rcstricted to a minority of worlters. They approved of unionism as
a device bcneficial t o the group interests of a privileged labor aristocracv, and did not concern thcrnselves about its consequences for
the rest of the wage ~ a r n c r s .N~o onc has ever succeeded in the effort
5. Cf. W . 11. Revcridgc, Full Enzplogment i n a Free Society (London, 1 9 4 ~ 1 ,
pp. 362-37'.
6. Cf, Hutt, T h e Theory of Collective Bargaining pp. IC-21.

Interference with the S t ~ z ~ c t ~ofr ePrices

765
to demonstrate that unionism could improve the conditions and raise
the standard of living of all those eager to earn wages.
It is important to remember also that Karl Marx did not contend
that unions could raise the average standard of wages. As he saw it,
"the general tendency of capitalistic production is not to raise, but
to sink the average standard of wages." Such being the tendency of
things, all that unionism can achieve with regard to wages is "making
the best of the occasional chances for their temporary improvement." * T h e unions counted for Marx only as far as they attacked
"the very system of wage slavery and present-day methods of production." * They should understand that "instead of the conservative
motto, A fair day's wages for n fair day's work! they ought to inscribe
on their banner the revolutionary watchword, ~ b d l i t i o nof the wages
system." T o n s i s t e n t Marxiam always opposed atrempts to impose
minimum wage rates as detrimental to the interests of the whole labor
class. From the beginning of the modern labor movement there was
always an antagonism between the unions and the revolutionary socialists. T h e older British and American unions were exclusively
dedicated to the enforcement of higher wage rates. They looked
askance upon socialism, "utopian" as well as "scientific." In ~ e r r n a n ~
there was a rivalry between the adepts of the Marxian creed and the
union leaders. Finally, in the last decades preceding the outbreak of
the first World War, the uniom triumphed. They virtually converted
the Social Democratic Party to the principles of interventionism and
unionism. In France, Georges Sore1 aimed at imbuing the unions with
that spirit of ruthless aggression and revolutionary bellicosity which
hlarx wanted to impart to them. There is today in every nonsocialist
country a manifest conflict between two irreconcilabIe factions within
the unions. One group considers unionism a device for the improvement of the workers' conditions within the frame of capitalism. T h e
other group wants to drive the unions into the ranks of militant communism and approves of them only as far as they are the pioneers of a
violent overthrow of the capitalistic system.
T h e problems of labor unionism have been obfuscated and utterly
confused by pseudo-humanitarian blather. The advocates of minimum
wage rates, whether decreed and enforced by the government or by
violent union action, contend that they are fighting for the improvement of the conditions of the working masses. They do not permit
anyone to question their dogma that minimum wage rates are the
7. Cf. Marx, Value, Price and Profit, ed. E. Marx hveling (Chicago, Charles
H. Kerr & Company), p. 125.
8. Cf. A. Lozovsky, Marx and the Trade Unions (New York, rg35), p. 17.
9, Cf. Marx, op. cit., pp. 126127.

766
Human Action
only appropriate means of raising wage rates permanently and for
all those eager to earn wages. They pride themselves on being the only
true friends of "labor," of the "common man," of "progress," and
of the eternal principles of "social justice."
However, the problem is precisely whether there is any means for
raising the standard of living of all those eager to work other than
raising the marginal productivity of labor by accelerating the increase
of capital as compared with population. T h e union doctrinaires are
intent upon obscuring this primary issue. They never refer to the
only point that matters, viz., the relation between the number of
workers and the quantity of capital goods available. But certain
policies of the unions involve a tacit acltnow-ledgmcnt of the correctness of the catallactic theorems concerning the determination of
wage rates. Unions are anxious to cut down the supply of labor by
anti-immigration laws and by preventing outsiders and newcomers
from competing in the unionized sectors of the labor market. They
are opposed to the export of capital. These policies would be nonsensicaI if it were true that the per capita quota of capital available
is of no importance for determination of wage rates.
T h e essence of the union doctrine is implied in the slogan exploitation. According to the union variety of the exploitation doctrine,
which differs in some points from the Marxian creed, labor is the only
source of wealth, and expenditure of labor the only real costs. By
rights, all proceeds from the sale of products should belong to the
workers. T h e worker has a fair claim to the whole produce of labor.
The wrong that the capitalistic mode of production does to the worker
consists in the fact that it permits landowners, capitalists, and entrepreneurs to withhold a part of the workers' portion. T h e share which
goes to these parasites is unearned income. I t is manifestly a predatory
revenue, a theft. T h e workers are right in their endeavors to raise
wage rates step by step to such a height that finally nothing will be
left for the support of a class of idle and socially useless exploiters.
in aiming at this end, they continue the battie whlch earlier generations fought for the emancipation of slaves and serfs and for the abolition of the imposts, tributes, tithes, and unpaid statute labor with
which the peasantry was burdened for the benefit of aristocratic
landlords. T h e labor movement is a struggle for freedom and equality,
and for the vindication of the inalienable rights of man. Its ultimate
victory is beyond doubt, for it is the inevitable trend of historical
evolution to wipe out all class privileges and to establish firmly the
realm of freedom and equality. T h e attempts of reactionary employers to halt progress are doomed.

Interference with the Swucture of Prices

767

Such are the tenets of present-day social doctrine. It is true that
some people, although in perfect agreement with its philosophical
ideas, support the practical conclusions derived by the radicals only
wirh certain reservations and qualifications. Thesc moderates do not
propose to abolish "management's" share alcogcther; they would be
satisfied with cutting it down to a "fair" amount. As the opinions
concerning the fairness of the revenues of the entreprcneurs and
capitalists vary widely, the difference betwcen the point of view of
the radicals and that of the moderates is of little moment. The moderates also endorse the principle that real wage rates should always rise
and never drop. In both world wars few voices in the United Statcs
disputed the claim of the unions that the wage earners' take-home
pay, even in a national emergency, should go up faster than the cost
of living.
All these sentimental disquisitions leave out of consideration the
problems that mattcr, viz., the economic aspects of the issue. They
take no notice of institutional unemployment, the inescapable result
of raising wage rates above the height determincd by the unhampercd
market.
As the union doctrine sees it, there is no harm in confiscating the
specific revenue of the capitalists and entrepreneurs partially or altogether. In dealing with this issue they speak of profits in the sense in
which the classical economists applied this term. They do not distinguish between entrepreneurial profit, interest on the capital employed,
and compensation for the technical services rendered by the entrepreneur. W e will deal later with the consequences resulthg from the
confiscation of interest and profits and with the syndicalist elements
involved in the "ability to pay" principle and in profit-sharing
schemes.1° W e have examined the purchasing power argument as
advanced in favor of a policy of raising wage rates above the potential
market rates.ll What remains is to scrutinize thc purport of the alleged
Ricardo effect.
Ricardo is the author of the proposition that a rise in wages wiIl
encourage capitalists to substitute machinery for labor and vice versa.'"
Hence, concludc the union apologists, a
of raising wage rates,
irrespective of what thcy would have been on the unhampercd labor
market, is always beneficial. It gencratcs technological improvement
and raises thc productivity of labor. Higher wages always pay for
Cf. below, pp. 800-816.
Cf. above, pp. 298-299.
1 2 . C f . Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, chap. i, sec. V.
The term "Ricardo effect" is used by Hayek, Profits, lnterest and Investment
(London, 1939),p. 8.
I o.
I I.

768
Hzcwzan Action
themselves. In forcing the reluctant employers to raise wage rates,
the unions become the pioneers of progress and prosperity.
Many economists approve of the Ricardian proposition although
few of them are consistent enough to endorse the inference the union
apologists draw from it. The Ricardo effect is by and large a stockin-trade of popular economics. Nonetheless, the theorem involved is
one of the worst economic fallacies.
The confusion starts with the misinterpretation of the statement
that machinery is "substituted" for labor. What happens is that labor
is rendered more efficient by the aid of machinery. The same input
of labor leads to a greater quantity or a better quality of products.
The employment of machinery itself does not directly result in a
reduction df the number of hands employed in the production of
the article A concerned. What brings about this secondary effect is
the fact that-other things being equal-an increase in the available
supply of A lowers the marginal utility of a unit of A as against that
of the units of other articles and that therefore labor is withdrawn
from the production of A and employed in the turning out of other
articles. The technological improvement i n the production of A makes
it possible to realize certain projects which could not be executed before because the workers required were employed for the production
of A for which consumers7demand was more urgent. The reduction
of the number of workers in the A industry is caused by the increased
demand of these other branches to which the opportunity to expand
is offered. Incidentally, this insight explodes all talk about "technological unemployment."
Tools and machinery are primarily not labor-saving devices, but
means to increase output per unit of input. They appear as laborsaving devices if looked upon exclusivcly from the point of view of
the individual branch of business concerned. Seen from the point of
view of the consumers and the whole of society, they appear as instruments that raise the productivity of human effort. They increase
and to
supp!j. aiid make it possible to comiiiiie more n~atclrial
enjoy more leisure. Which goods will bc consumed in greater quantity
and to what extent people will prefer to enjoy more leisure depends on
people's value judgments.
The employment of more and better tools is feasible only to the
extent that the capital required is available. Saving-that is, a surplus
of production over consumption-is the indispensable condition of
every further step toward technological improvement. Mere technologicaI knowledge is of no use if the capita1 needed is lacking. Chinese

Interference mitt3 the Structure of Prices
businessmen are familiar with American ways of production. What
prevents them from adopting the American mcthods is not the lowness of Chinese wages, but lack of capital.
On the other hand, capitalist saving necessarily causes employment
of additional tools and machinery. T h e role that plain saving, i.e., the
piling up of stocks of consumers' goods as a reserve for rainy days,
plays in the market economy is negligible. Under capitalism saving is
as a rule capitalist saving. T h e excess of production over consumption
is invested either directly in the saver's own business or farm or indirectly in othcr ~ e o ~ l c s '
enterprises through the instrumentality of
savings deposits, common and preferred stock, bonds, debentures, and
mortgages.'To the extent to which people keep their consumption
below their net income, additional capital is created and at the same
timc crnploved for thc expansion of the capital equipment of the
apparatus of production. As has been pointed out, this outcome cannot be affected by any synchronous tendency toward an increase in
cash holdings.14 On one hand, what is unconditionally needed for the
employment of more and better tools is additional accumulation of
capital. On the other hand, there is no employment available for
additional capital other than that provided by the application of more
and better tools.
Ricardo's proposition and the union doctrinc derived from it turn
things upside down. A tendency toward higher wage rates is not
the cause, but thc effect, of technological improvement. Profit-seeking
business is compelled to employ the most efficient methods of production. What checks a businessman's endeavors to improve the equipment of his firm is only lack of capital. If the capital rcquired is not
available, no meddling with wage rates can provide it.
All that minimum wage rates can accomplish with regard to the
einployment of machinery is to shift additional investment from one
hranch into another. T,et us assume that in an cconornically backward
country, Ruritania, the stevedores' union succeeds in forcing the
entrcprencurs to pay wage rates which are comparatively much higher
than those paid in the rest of the country's industries. Then it may
result that the most profitable employment for additional capital is
to utilize mechanical devices in the 1bading and unloading of ships.
But the capital thus employed is withheld from other branchcs of
Ruritania's business in which, in the absence of the union's policy,
1 3 . .4s we are dealing here with the conditions of the unhampered market economy, we may disregard the capital-consuming effects of government borrowing.
14. See above, pp. 51y520.

770

Human Action

it would have been employed in a more profitable way. The effect of
the high wages of the stevedores is not an increase, but a drop in
Ruritania's total production.'"
Real wage rates can rise only to the extent that, other things being
equal, capital becomes more plentiful. If the government or the
unions succeed in enforcing wage rates which are higher than those
the unhampered labor market would have determined, the supply
of labor exceeds the denland for labor. Institutional unen~ployment
emerges.
Firmly committed to the principles of interventionism, governments try to check this undesired resuIt of their interference by resorting to those measures which arc nowadays called full-ernploymcnt
policy: unemployment doles, arbitration of labor disputes: public
worlts by means of lavish public spending, inflation, and credit expansion. A11 these remedies are worse than the evil they are designed
to remove.
Assistance granted to the unemployed does not dispose of unemployment. It makes it easier for the unemployed to remain idle. The
nearer the allowance comes to the height at which the unhampered
markct would have fixed the wage rate, the less incentive it offers to
the beneficiary to look for a new job. It is a means of making unemployment last rather than of malting it disappear. The disastrous
financial implications of unemployment benefits are manifest.
Arbitration is not an appropriate method for the settlement of
disputes concerning the height of wage rates. If the arbitrators' award
fixes wage rates exactly at the potential market rate or below that
rate, it is supererogatorv. If it fixes wage ratcs above the potential
market rate, the conseq;ences are the same that any other mode of
fixing minimum wagc rates above the market height brings about,
viz., institutional unemployment. It does not matter to what pretext
the arbitrator resorts in order to justify his decision. What matters
is not whether wages are "fair" or "unfair" by some arbitrary standard, but whether they do or do not bring about an excess of suppi?
of labor over demand for labor. I t may seem fair to some people to
fix wage rates at such a height that a great part of the potential labor
force is doomed to lasting unemployment. But nobody can assert
that it is expedient and beneficial to society.
If government spending is financed by taxing the citizens or borrowing from them, the citizens' power to spend and invest is curtailed
15. T h e example is merely hypothetical. Such a powerful union would probably prohibit the employment of mechanical deviccs in the loading and unloading of ships in order to "create more jobs."

lnte~ferencewith the Structure of Prices

771

to the same extent as that of the public treasury expands. N o additional
jobs are created.
But if the government finances its spending program by inflationb y an increase in the quantity of money and by credit expansion-it:
causes a general cash-induced rise in the prices of all commodities and
services. If in the course of such an inflation the rise in wage rates
sufficientiy lags behind the rise in the prices of commodities, institutional unemployment may shrink or disappear altogether. But what
makes it shrink or disappear is precisely the fact that such an outcome
is tantamount to a drop in real wage rates. Lord Keynes considered
credit expansion an efficient method for the abolition of unemployment; he believed that "gradual and automatic lowering of real wages
as a result of rising prices" would not be so strongly resisted b y labor
as any attempt to lower money wage rates.l0 However, the success of
such a cunning plan would require an unlikeIy degree of ignorance
and stupidity on the part of the wage earners. As long as workers
believe that minimum wage rates benefit them, they will not let themselves be cheated by such clever tricks.
In practice all these devices of an alleged full employment policy
finally lead to the establishment of socialism of the German pattern.
As the members of an arbitration court whom the employers have
appointed and those whom the unions have appointed never agree
with regard to the fairness of a definite rate, the decision virtually
devolves upon the members appointed by the government. T h e power
to determine the height of wage rates is thus vested in the government.
The more public works expand and the more the government
undertakes in order to fill the gap left b y "private enterprise's inability to provide jobs for all," the more the realm of private enterprise shrinks. Thus we are again faced with the alternative of capitalism or socialism. There cannot be any question of a lasting policy of
minimum wage rates.

T h e Catalloctic Aspects of Labor Unionism
The only catallactic problem with regard to labor unions is the question
of whether or not it is possible to raise by pressure and compulsion the
wage rates of a11 those eager to earn wages above the height the unhampered market would have determined.
In all countries the labor unions have actually acquired the privilege
16. C f . Keynes, T h e General T h e o r y o f Employment, Interest and Money
(London, r936), p. 264. For a critical examination of this idea see Albert IIahn,
Deficit Spending and Private Enterprise, Postwar Readjustments Bulletin No. 8,
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, pp. 28-29. About the success of the Keynesian
stratagem in the 'thirties, cf. below, pp. 786-787.

772

Hunzan Action

of violent action. The governments have abandoned in their favor the
essential attribute of government, the exclusive power and right to resort
to violent coercion and compulsion. Of course, the laws which make it a
criminal offense for any citizen to resort-except in case of self-defenseto violent action have not been formally repealed or amended. However,
actually labor union violence is tolerated within broad limits. T h e labor
unions are practically free to prevent by force anybody from defying their
orders concerning wage rates and other labor conditions. They are free to
inflict with impunity bodily evils upon strikebreakers and upon entrepreneurs and mandataries of entrepreneurs who employ strikebreakers.
They are free to destroy property of such employers and even to injure
customers patronizing their shops. The authorities, with the approval of
public opinion, condone such acts. The police do not stop such offenders,
the state attorneys do not arraign them, and no opportunity is offered t o
the penal courts to pass judgment on their actions. In excessive cases, if
the deeds of violence go too far, some lame and tinlid attempts at repression and prevention are ventured. But as a rule they fail. Their failure is
sometimes due to bureaucratic inefficiency or to the insufficiency of the
means at the disposal of the authorities, but more often to the unwillingness
of the whole governmental apparatus to interfere successfully.
Such has been the state of affairs for a long tirne in all nonsocialist countries. T h e economist in establishing these facts neither blames nor accuses.
He merely explains what conditions have given to the unions the power ro
enforce their minimum wage rates and what the real meaning of the term
collective bargaining is.
As union advocates explain the term collective bargaining, it merely
means the substitution of a union's bargaining for the individual bargaining
of the individual workers. In the fully developed market economy bargaining concerning those commodities and services of which homogeneous
items are frequently bought and sold in great quantities is not effected b y
the manner in which nonfungible con~moditiesand services are traded.
The buyer or seller of fungible consumers' goods or of fungible services
fixes a price tentatively and adjusts it later according to the response his
offer meets from those interested until he is in a position to buy or to sell as
much as he plans. Technically no other procedure is feasible. T h e department store cannot haggle with its patrons. It fixes the price of an article
and waits. If the public does not buy sufficient quantities, it lowers the
price. A factory that needs five hundred welders fixes a wage rate which,
as it expects, will enable it t o hire five hundred men. If only a minor number turns up, it is forced to allow a higher rate. Every employer must raise
the wages he offers up to the point at which no competitor Iures the
workers away by overbidding. What makes the enforcement of minimum
wage rates futile is precisely the fact that with wages raised above this
point competitors do not turn up with a demand for labor big enough to
absorb the whole supply.
If the unions were really bargaining agencies, their collective bargain-

Interference u i t h the Structure of Prices

773

ing could not raise the height of wage rates above the point of the unhampered market. As long as there still are unemployed workers available,
there is no reason for an employer to raise his offer. Real collective bargaining would not differ cataIlactically from individual bargaining. It
would, like individual bargaining, give a virtual voicc to those job-seekers
who have not yet found the jobs they are Iooking for.
However, what is euphemistically caIled collective bargaining by union
leaders and "pro-labor" legislation is of a quite different character. I t is
bargaining at the point of a gun. It is bargaining between an armed party,
ready to use its weapons, and an unarmed party under duress. It is not a
market transaction. It is a dictate forced upon the employer. And its effects
do not differ from those of a government decree for the enforcement of
which the police power and the penal courts are used. It produces institutional unemployment.
The treatment of the problems involved by public opinion and the vast
number of pseudo-economic writings is utterly misleading. The issue is
not the right to form associations. It is whether or not any association of
private citizens should be granted the privilege of resorting with impunity
to violent action. It is the same problem that relates to the activities of the
Ku Klux Klan.
hTeithcris it correct t o look upon the matter from the point of view of a
"right to strike." The problem is not the right to strike, but the right-by
intimidation or violence-to force other people to strike, and the further
right to prevent anybody from working in a shop in which a union has
caIled a strike. When the unions invoke the right to strike in justification
of such intimidation and deeds of violence, they are on no better ground
than a religious group would be in invoking the right of freedom of conscience as a justification of persecuting dissenters.
When in the past the laws of some countries denied to employees the
right to form unions, they were guided by the idea that such unions have
no obj cctive other than to resort to violent action and intimidation. When
the authorities in the past sometimes directed their armed forces to protect
the employers, their mandataries, and their property against the onslaught
of strikers, they were not guilty of acts hostile to "labor." They simply did
what every government considers its main duty. They tried to preserve
their exclusive right to rcsort to violent action.
There is no need for economics to enter into an examination of the
problems of jurisdictional strikes and of various laws, especially of the
American New Deal, which wcre admittedly loaded against the employers and which assigned a privileged position to the unions. There is
only one point that matters. If a government decree or labor union pressure
and compulsion fix wage rates above the height of the potential market
rates, institutional unemployment results.

XXXI. CURREXCY AND CREDIT &IANIPULATION
1.

The Government and the Currency

of exchange and money are n~arltetphenomena. What
makes a thing a medium of exchange or money is the conduct
M
of parties to market transactions. An occasion for dealing with rnoncEDIA

tary problems appears to the authorities in the same way in which they
concern themselves with all other objects exchanged, namely, when
they are called upon to decide whether or not the failure of one of the
parties to an act of exchange to comply with his contractual obligations justifies compulsion on thc part of the government apparatus
of violent oppression. If both parties discharge their mutual obligations instantly and synchronously, as a rule no conflicts arisc which
would induce one of the parties to apply to the judiciary. But if
one or both parties' obligations are ten~porallydeferred, it may happen
that the courts are called to decide how the terms of the contract are
to be complied with. If payment of a sum of money is involved, this
implies the task of determining what meaning is to be attached to the
monetary terms used in the contract.
Thus it devolves upon the laws of the country and upon the courts
to define what the parties to the contract had in mind when speaking
of a sum of money and to establish how the obligation to pay such a
sum is to be settled in accordance with the terms agreed upon. They
have to determine what is and what is not legal tender. In attending
to this task the laws and the courts do not create money. A thing becomes money only by virtue of the fact that those exchanging con+
n~oditiesand services commonly use it as a medium of exchange. in
the unhampered market economy the laws and the judges in attributing legal tender quality to a certain thing merely establish what, according to the usages of trade, was intended by the parties when they
referred in their deal to a definite kind of money. They interpret the
customs of the trade in the same way in which they proceed when
called to determine what is the meaning of any other terms used in
contracts.
Mintage has long been a prerogative of the rulers of the country.
However, this government activity had originally no objective other

Currency and Credit Manipulation

775

than the stamping and certifying of weights and measures. The authority's stamp placed upon a piece of metal was supposed to certify its
weight and fineness. When later princes resorted to substituting baser
and cheaper metals for a part of the precious metals while retaining
the customary face and name of the coins, they did it furtively and
in full awareness of the fact that they were engaged in a fraudulent
attempt to cheat the public. As soon as people found out these artifices,
the debased coins were dealt with at a discount as against the old
better ones. The governments reacted by resorting to compulsion
and coercion. They made it illegal to discriminate in trade and in the
settlement of deferred payments between "good" money and "bad"
money and decreed maximum prices in terms of "bad" money. However, the result obtained was not that which the governmcnts aimed at.
Their decrees failed to stop the process which adjusted commodity
prices (in terms of the debased currency) to the actual state of the
money relation. Moreover, the effects appeared which Gresham's
Law describes.
The history of government interfercnce with currency is, however,
not merely a record of debasement practices and of abortive attempts
to avoid their inescapable catallactic consequences. There were
governments that did not look upon their mintage prerogative as a
means of cheating that part of the public who placed confidence in
their rulers' integrity and who, out of ignorance, were ready to accept
the debased coins at their face value. These governments considered
the manufacturing of coins pot as 3 source of surreptitious fiscal lucre
but as a public service designed to safeguard a smooth functioning of
the market. But even these governments-out of ignorance and dilettantism-often resorted to measures which were tantamount to interference with the price structure, although they were not deliberately
planned as such. As two precious mctals w e k used side by side as
money, the authorities nai'vely hclieved that it was their task to unify
the currency system by decreeing a rigid exchange ratio between
gold and silver. The bimetallic system proved a complete failure.
It did not bring about bimetallism, but an alternating standard. That
metaI which, compared with the instantaneous state of the fluctuating
market exchange rate between gold and silver, was overvalued in
the legally fixed ratio, predominated in domestic circulation, while
the other mctal disappeared. Finally the governincnts abandoned their
vain attempts and acquiesced to monometallism. The present silver
purchase policy of the American Government is not seriously a device
of monetary policy. It is merely a device for raising the price of
silver for the benefit of the owners of silver mines, their employees,

776
Human Action
and the states within whose boundaries the mines are located. It is
a hardly disguised subsidy. Its monetary significance consists exclusively in the fact that it is financed by issuing additional dollar
notes whose legal tender quality does not differ essentially from that
of the Federal Reserve notes, although they bear the practically meaningless imprint "Silver Certificate."
Yet economic history also provides instances of well-designed and
successful monetary policies on the part of governments whose only
intention was to equip their countries with a smoothly working currency system. Laissez-faire liberalism did not abolish the traditional
government prerogative of mintage. But in the hands of the liberal
governments the character of this state monopoly was completely
altered. The ideas which considered it an instrument of interventionist policies were discarded. No longer was it used for fiscal purposes or for favoring some groups of the people at the expense of
other groups. The government's monetary activities aimed at one
objective only: to facilitate and to simplify the use of the medium of
exchange which the conduct of the people had made money. A nation's currency system, it was agreed, should be sound. The principle
of soundness meant that the standard coins-ix., those to which
unlimited legal tender power was assigned by the laws-should be
properly assayed and stamped bars of bullion coined in such a way
as to make the detection of clipping, abrasion, and counterfeiting
easy. T o the government's stamp no function was attributed other
than to certify the weight and the fineness of the metal contained.
Pieces worn by usage or in any other way reduced in weight beyond
the very narrow limits of tolerated allowance lost their legal tender
quality; the authorities themselves withdrew such pieces from circulation and reminted them. For the receiver of an undefaced coin
there was no need to resort to the scales and to the melting pot in
order to know its weight and content. On the other hand, individuals
were entitled to bring bullion to the mint and to have it transformed
into standard coins either free of charge or against payment of a
seigniorage generally not surpassing the actual expenses of the process. Thus the various national currencies became genuine gold currencies. Stability in the exchange ratio between the domestic legal
tender and that of all other countries which had adopted the same
principles of sound money was thus brought about. The international
gold standard came into being without intergovernmental treaties
and institutions.
In many countries the emergence of the gold standard was effected
by the operation of Gresham's Law. The role that government pol-

Crarency a~zdC ~ e d i tManipulation
icies played in the process in Great Britain consisted merely in ratifying thc results brought about by the operation of Gresham's Law;
it transformed a de facto state of affairs into a legal state. In other
countries the governments deliberately abandoned bimetalIism just
at the moment when the change in the market ratio between gold
and silver would have brought about a substitution of a de facto silver
currency for the then prevailing de facto gold currency. With all
these nations the formal adoption of the gold standard required no
other contribution on the part of the administration and the legislature than the enactment of laws.
It was different in those countries which wanted to substitute the
gold standard for a-de fact0 or dc jure-silver or paper currency.
When the German Reich in the 'seventies of the nineteenth century
wanted to adopt the gold standard, the nation's currency was silver.
I t could not realize its plan b y simply imitating the procedure of
those countries in which the enactment of the gold standard was
merely a ratification of the actual state of affairs. I t had to exchange
'the silver standard coins in the hands of the public against gold coins.
This was a time-absorbing and complicated financial operation involving vast government
of gold and sales of silver. Conditions were similar in those countries which aimed at the substitution
of gold for credit money or fiat money.
It is important to realize these facts because they illustrate the difference between conditions as they prevailed in the liberal age and
those prevailing today in the age of interventionism.
2.

The Interventionist Aspect of Legal T e n d e r Legislation

T h e simplest and oldest variety of monetary interventionism is
debasement of coins or diminution of their weight or size for the
sake of debt abatement. The authority assigns to the cheaper currency full legal tender power. All deferred payments can be legally
discharged by payment of the amount due in the meaner coins according to their face vglue. Debtors are favored at the expense of
creditors. But at the same time future credit transactions are made
more onerous for debtors. A tendency for gross market rates of
interest t o rise ensues as the parties take into account the chances for
a repetition of such measures of debt abatement. While debt abatement improves the conditions of those who were already indebted at
the moment, it impairs the position of those eager or obliged to contract new debts.
T h e antitype of debt abatement-debt aggravation through monetary measures-has also been practiced, though rarely. However, it

7 78

Human Action

has never deliberately been planned as a device to favor the creditors
at the expense of the debtors. Whenever it came to pass, it was the
unintentional effect of monetary changes considered as peremptory
from other points of view. In resorting to such monetary changes
governments put up with their effects upon deferred payments either
because they considered the measures unavoidable or because they
assumed that creditors and debtors, in determining the terms of the
contract, had already foreseen these changes and duly taken them
into account. The best examples are provided by British events after
the Napoleonic wars and again after the first World War. In both
illstances Great Britain some time after the end of hostilities returned,
by means of a deflationary policy, to the prewar gold parity of the
pound sterling. The idea of engineering the substitution of the gold
standard for the war-time credit-money standard by acquiescing in
the change in the market exchange ratio between the pound and gold,
which had already taken place, and of adopting this ratio as the new
legal parity, was rejected. This second alternative was scorned as a
kind of national bankruptcy, as a partial repudiation of the public
debt, and as a malicious infringement upon the rights of all those
whose claims had originated in the period preceding the suspension
of the unconditional convertibility of the banknotes of the Bank
of England. People labored under the delusion that the evils caused
by inflation could be cured by a subsequent deflation. Yet the return
to the prewar gold parity could not indemnify the creditors for the
damage they had suffered as far as the debtors had repaid their old
debts during the period of money depreciation. Moreover, it was a
boon to all those who had lent during this period and a bIow to all
those who had borrowed. But the statesmen who were responsible
for the deflationary policy were not aware of the import of their
action. They failed to see consequences which were, even in their
eyes, undesirable, and if they had recognized them in time, they
would not have known how to avoid them. Their conduct of affairs
really favored the creditors at the expense of the debtors, especially
the holders of the government bonds at the expense of the taxpayers.
In thc 'twenties of the nineteenth century it aggravated seriously
the distress of British agriculture and a h~mdredyears later the plight
of British export trade. Nonetheless, it would be a mistake to call
these two British monetary reforms the consummation of an interventionism intentionally aiming at debt aggravation. Debt aggravation was merely an attending phenomenon of a policy aiming at
other ends.
Whenever debt abatement is resorted to, its authors protest that

Currency and Credit Manipulation

779

the measure will never be repeated. They emphasize that extraordinary conditions which will never again present themselves have
created an emergency which makes indispensable recourse to noxious
devices, absoIutely reprehensible under any other circumstances.
Once and never again, they declare. It is easy to conceive why the
authors and supporters of debt abatement are compelled to h a k e
such promises. If total or partial nullification of the creditors' claims
1)ecomes a regular policy, lending of money will stop altogether.
'The stipulation of deferred payments depends on the expectation that
no such nulIification will be decreed.
It is therefore not permissible to look upon debt abatement as a
device of a system of economic policies which could be considered
as an alternative to any other system of society's permanent economic
organization. It is by no means a tool of constructive action. It is a
bomb that destroys and can do nothing but destroy. If it is applied
only once, a reconstruction of the shattered credit system is still
possible. But if the blows are repeated, total destruction results.
It is not correct to look upon inflation and deflation exclusively
from the point of view of their eff ects upon deferred payments. I t has
been shown that cash-induced changes in purchasing power do not
affect the prices of the various commodities and services at the same
time and to the same extent, and what role this unevenness plays in
the market.l But if one regards inflation and deflation as means
of rearranging the relations between creditors and debtors, one cannot fail to reaIize that the ends sought by the government resorting
to them are attained only in a very imperfect degree and that, besides, consequences appear which, from the government's point of
view, are highly unsatisfactory. As is the case with every other
variety of government interference with the price structure, the results obtained not only are contrary to the intentions of the government but produce a state of affairs which, in the opinion of the government, is more undesirable than conditions on the unhampered
market.
As far as a government resorts to inflation in order to favor the
debtors at the expense of the creditors, it succeeds only with regard
to those deferred payments which were stipulated before. Inflaticjn
does not make it cheaper to contract new loans; it makes it, on the
contrary, more expensive by the appearance of a positive price
premium. If inflation is pushed to its ultimate consequences, it makes
any stipulation of deferred payments in terms of the inflated currency cease altogether.
I . See above,

pp. 408-410.

780

Human Action

3. The Evolution of Modern Methods of Currency
Manipulation

A metallic currency is not subject to government manipulation.
Of course, the government has the power to enact legal tender laws.
But then the operation of Gresham's Law brings about results which
may frustrate the aims sought by the government. Seen from this
point of view, a metallic standard appears as an obstacle to all attempts to interfere with the nlarkct phenomena by monetary policies.
In examining the evolution which gave governments the power
to manipulate their national currcncy systems, we must begin by
mentioning one of the most serious shortcomings of the classical
economists. Both Adam Smith and David Ricardo looked upon the
costs involved in the preservation of a metallic currency as a waste.
As they saw it, the substitution of paper money for m&allic money
tvould make it possible to employ capital and labor, required for the
production of the quantity of gold and silver needed for monetary
purposes, for the production of goods which could dircctly satisfy
human wants. Starting from this assumption, Ricardo elaborated his
famous Proposals for an Economical arzd Secure CZWI-ency,first published in I 816. Ricardo's plan fell into oblivion. I t was not until many
decades after his death that several countries adopted its basic principles under the label gold exchange standard in ordcr to reduce the
alleged waste involved in the operation of the gold standard nowadays decried as "classical" or "orthodox."
Under the classical gold standard a part of the cash holdings of
individuals consists in gold coins. Under the gold exchange standard
the cash holdings of individuals consist entirely in money-substitutes.
These money-substitutes arc redeemable at the legal par in gold or
foreign exchange of countries under the gold standnrd or the gold
exchange standard. But the arrangement of monetary and banking
institutions aims at preventing thc public from withdrawing gold
from h e Ccnrrai Iiank for domestic cash hoidings. T n e first objecii\.c
of redemption is to secure the stability of foreign exchange rates.
In dealing with the problems of the gold exchange standard all
economists-including the author of this book-failed to realize the
fact that it places in the hands of governments the power to manipulate their nations' currency easily. Economists blithely assumed that
no government of a civilized nation would use the gold exchange
standard intentionally as an instrument of inflationary policy. Of
course, one must not exaggerate the role that the gold exchange
standard played in the inflationary ventures of the last decades. T h e

Currency and Credit Manipulation

781

main factor was the proinflationary ideology. T h e gold exchange
standard was merely a convenient vehicle for the realization of the
inflationary plans. Its absence did not hinder the adoption of inflationary measures. The United States was in 1933 by and large still
undcr the classicaI gold standard. This fact did not stop the New
Deal's inflationism. The United States at one stroke-by confiscating
its citizens' gold holdings-abolished the classical gold standard and
devalued the dollar against gold.
The new variety of the gold exchange standard as it developed in
the years between the first and the second World Wars may be
called the flexible gold exchange standard or, for the sake of simplicity, the flexible standard. Under this system the Central Bank or
the Foreign Exchange Equalization Account (or whatever the name
of the equivalent governmental institution may be) freely exchanges
the money-substitutes which are the country's national legal tender
either against gold or against foreign exchange, and vice versa. The
ratio at which these exchange deals are transacted is not invariably
fixed, but subject to changes. The parity is flexible, as people say.
This flexibility, however, is practically always a downward flexibility. The authorities used thcir power to lower the equivalence of
the national currency in terms of gold and of those foreign currencies
whose equivalcnce against gold did not drop; they never ventured to
raise it. If the parity against another nation's currency was raised, the
change was only the consummation of a drop that had occurred in
that other currency's equivalence (in terms of gold or of other nations' currencies which had remained unchanged). Its aim was to
bring the appraisal of this definite foreign currency into agreement
with the appraisal of gold and the currencies of other foreign nations.
If the downward jump of the parity is very conspicuous, it is called
a devaluation. If the alteration of the parity is not so great, editors of
financial reports describe it as a weakening in the international appraisaI of the currency ~ o n c e r n e d .In~ both cases it is usual to refer
to the event by deciaring that fhc country concerned has raised the
price of gold.
The characterization of the flexible standard from the catallactic
point of view must not be confused with its description from the
legal point of view. The cataIlactic aspccts of the issue are not affected
by the constitutional problems involved. It is immaterial whether the
power to alter the parity is vested in the Iegislative or in the administrative branch of the government. I t is immateriaI whether the authorization given to the administration is unlimited or, as was the case
2.

See above, p. 458.

782

Human Action

in the United States under New Deal legislation, limited by a terminal
point beyond which the officers are not free to devalue further. What
counts alone for the economic treatment of the matter is that the
principle of flexible parities has been substituted for the principle of
the rigid parity. Whatever the constitutional state of affairs may be,
no government could embark upon "raising the price of gold" if
public opinion were opposed to such a manipulation. If, on the other
hand, public opinion favors such a step, no legal technicalities could
check it altogethcr or even delay it for a short time. What happened
in Great Britain in 1931, in the United States in 1933, and in France
and Switzerland in 1936 clearly shows that the apparatus of represcntative government is able to work with the utmost speed if public
opinion endorses the so-called experts' opinion concerning the expediency and necessity of a currency's dcvaluation.
One of the main objectives of currency devaluation-whether
large-scale or small-scale-is, as will be shown in the next section, to
rearrange foreign trade conditions. These effects upon foreign trade
rnake it impossible for a small nation to take its own course in currency manipulation irrespective of what those countries are doing
with whom its trade relations are closest. Such nations are forced to
follow in the wake of a foreign country's monetary policies. As far as
monetary policy is concerned they voluntarily become satellites of
a foreign power. By keeping their own country's currency rigidly
at par against the currency of a monetary "suzerain-country," they
follow all the alrerations which the "suzerain" brings about in i;s
own currency's parity against gold and the other nation's currencies.
They join a monetary bloc and integrate their country into a monetary area. The most talked about bloc or area is the sterling bloc or
area.
Thc flexible standard must not be confused with conditions in those
countries in which the government has merely proclaimed an official
parity of its domestic currency against gold and foreign exchange
without making this parity effective. The characteristic feature of
the flexible standard is that any amount of domestic money-substitutes can in fact be freely exchanged at the parity chosen against
gold or foreign exchange, and vice versa. At this parity the Central
Bank (or whatever the name of the government agency entrusted
with the task may be) freely buys and sells any amount of domestic
currency and of foreign currency of at least one of those countries
which themselves are either under the gold standard or under the
flexible standard. The domestic banknotes are really redeemable.
In the absence of this essentiaI feature of the flexible standard, de-

Currency and Credit Manipulation

783

Crees proclaiming a definite parity have a quite different meaning and
bring about quite different effect^.^

4. The Objectives of Currency Devaluation
T h e flexible standard is an instrument for the engineering of inflation. T h e only reason for its acceptance was to make reiterated inflationary moves technically as simpIe as possible for the authorities.
In the boom period that ended in 1929 labor unions had succeeded
in almost all countries in enforcing wage rates higher than those
which the market, if rnanipulatcd only by migration barriers, would
have determined. These wage rates already produced in many countries institutional unemployment of a considerable amount while
credit expansion was still going on at an accelerated pace. When finally
the inescapable depression came and commodity prices began to drop,
the labor unions, firmly supported by the governments, even by those
disparaged as anti-labor, clung stubbornly to their high-wages policy.
T h e y either flatly denied permission for any cut in nominal wage rates
or conceded only insufficient cuts. T h e result was a tremendous increase in institutional unemployment. (On the other hand, those
workers who retained their jobs improved their standard of living
as their hourly real wages went up.) The burden of unemployment
doles became unbearable. The millions of unemployed were a serious
menace to domestic peace. The industrial countries were haunted by
the specter of revolution. But union leaders were intractable, and no
statesman had the courage to challenge them openly.
In this plight the frightened rulers bethought themselves of a
makeshift long since recommended by inflationist doctrinaires. As
unions objected to an adjustment of wages to the state of the money
relation and commodity prices, they chose t o adjust the money relation and commodity prices to the height of wage rates. As they saw
it, it was not wage rates that were too high; their own nation's monetary unit was overvalued in terms of gold and foreign exchange and
had to be readjusted. Devaluation was the panacea.
T h e objectives of devaluation were:
I . T o presen7e the height of nominal wage rates or even to create
the conditions required for their further increase, while real wage
rates should rather sink.
2 . T o make commodity prices, especially the prices of farm products, rise in terms of domestic money or, at least, to check their further drop.
3 . See below, section 6 of this chapter.

7 84

Human Action

3. T o favor the debtors at the expense of the creditors.
4. T o encourage exports and to reduce imports.
5. T o attract more foreign tourists and to make it more expensive
(in tcrms of domestic money) for the country's own citizens to visit
foreign countries.
However, neither the governn~entsnor the literary champions of
their policy were frank enough to admit openly that one of the main
purposes of devaluation was a reduction in the height of real wage
rates. They preferred for the most part to describe the objective of
devaluation as the removal of an alleged "fundamental disequilibrium"
between the domestic and the international "levcl" of prices. They
spoke of the necessity of lowcring domestic costs of production. But
they were anxious nor to mention that one of the two cost items they
expected to lower by devaluation was real wage rates, the other being
interest stipulated on long-term business debts and the principal of
such debts.
It is impossible to take seriously the arguments advanced in favor
of devaluation. Thcy were utterfy confused and contradictory. For
devaluation was not a policy that originated from a cool weighing of
the pros and cons. It was a capitulation of governments to union
leaders who did not want to lose face by admitting that their wage
policy had failed and had produced institutional unemployment on
an unprecedented scale. I t was a desperate makeshift of weak and
inept statesmen who were motivated by their wish to prolong their
tenure of office. In justifying their policy, these demagogues did not
bothcr about contradictions. They promised the processing industries
and the farmers that devaluation would make prices rise. But at the
same time they promised the consumers that rigid price control
would prevent any increasc in the cost of living.
After all, the governments could still excuse their conduct bv referring to the fact that under the given state of public opinion, entirely under the sway of the doctrinal fallacies of labor unionism, no
other policy couid be resorted to. No such excuse can be advanced
for those authors who hailed the flexibility of foreign exchange rates
as the perfect and most desirable monetary system. While governments were still anxious to emphasize that devnluation was an emergency measure not to be repeated again, these authors proclaimed the
flexible standard as the most appropriate monetary system and werc
eager to demonstrate the alleged evils inherent in stability of foreign
exchange rates. In their blind zeal to please the governments and the
powerfuI pressure groups of unionized labor and farming, they over-

Currency and Credit itlanipulation

785

stated tremendously the case of flexible parities. But the drawbacks of
standard flexibility became manifest very soon. T h e enthusiasm for
devaluation vanished quickly. In the years of the second World War,
hardly more than a decade after theeday when Great Britain had set
the pattern for the flexible standard, even Lord Keynes and his adepts
discovered that stability of foreign exchange rates has its merits. One
of the avowed objectives of the International Monetary Fund is to
stabilize foreign exchange rates.
If one looks at devaluation not with the eyes of an apologist of government and union policies, but with the eyes of an economist, one
must first of all stress the point that all its alleged bIessings arc ternporary only. Moreover, they depend on the condition that only
one country devalues while the other countries abstain from devaIuing their own currencies. If the other countries devalue in the
same proportion, no changes in foreign tradc appear. If they devalue
to a greater extent, all these transitory blessings, whatever they may
be, favor them exclusively. A general acceptance of the principles of
the flexible standard must therefore result in a mutual overbidding between the nations. At the end of this race is the complete destruction
of all nations' monetary systems.
'The much talked about advantages which devaluation secures in
foreign trade and tourism, are entirely due, to the fact that the adjustment of domestic prices and wage rates to the state of affairs
created by devaluation requires some time. As long as this adjustment
process is not yet completed, exporting is encouraged and importing
is discouraged. However, this nierely means that in this interval the
citizens of the devaluating country arc getting less for what they are
selling abroad and paying more for what they are buying abroad; concomitantly they must restrict their consumption. This effect may
appear as a boon in the opinion of those for whom the balance of
tradc is the yardstick of a nation's welfare. In plain language it is to
be described in this way: T h e British citizen must export more
Eritish goods in order to buy that quantity of tea which he received
before the devaluation for a smaller quantity of exported British
goods.
T h c devaluation, say its champions, reduces the burden of debts.
This is certainly true. It favors debtors at the expense of creditors.
In the eyes of those who still have not learned that under modern
conditions the creditors must not be identified with the rich nor
the debtors with the poor, this is beneficial. T h e actual effect is that
thc indebted owners of real estate and farm land and the shareholders

786

Human Action

of indebted corporations are helped to the disadvantage of the enormous majority whose savings are invested in bonds, debentures,
savings-bank deposits, and insurance policies.
There are also foreign loans to be considered. When Great Britain,
the United States, France, Switzerland, and some other European
crediror countries devalued their currencies, they made a gift to
their foreign debtors.
One of the main arguments advanced in favor of the flexible standard is that it lowers the rate of interest on the domestic money market.
Under the classical gold standard and the rigid gold exchange standard, it is said, a country must adjust the domestic rate of interest to
conditions on the international money market. Under the flexible
standard it is free to follow in the determination of interest rates a
policy exclusively guided by considerations of its own domestic welfare.
T h e argument is obviously untenable with regard to those countries in which the total amount of debts to foreign countries exceeds
the total amount of loans granted to foreign countries. When in the
course of the nineteenth century some of these debtor nations adopted
a sound money policy, their firms and citizens couId contract foreign
debts in terms of their national currency. This opportunity disappeared altogether with. the change in these countries' monetary
policies. No American banker would contract a loan in Italian lire or
try to float an issue of lire bonds. As far as foreign credits are concerned, no change in a debtor country's domestic currency conditions
can be of any avail. As far as domestic credits are concerned, devaluation abates only the already previously contracted debts. It enhances
the gross market rate of interest of new debts as it makes a positive
price premium appear.
This is valid also with regard to interest rate conditions in the
creditor nations. There is no need to add anything to the demonstration that interest is not a monetary phenomenon and cannot in the
long run be affected by monetary measures.
It is true that the devaluations which were resorted to by various
governments between 1931 and 1938 made reaI wage rates drop in
some countries and thus reduced the amount of institutional unemployment. The historian in dealing with these devaluations may
therefore say that they were a success as they prevented a revolutionary upheaval of the daily increasing masses of unemployed and as,
under the prevailing ideological conditions, no other means could be
resorted to in this critical situation. But the historian will no less have to
add that the remedy did not affect the root causes of institutional

Currency and Credit Manipulation
unemployment, the faulty tenets of labor unionism. Devaluation was
a cunning device to elude the sway of the union doctrine. It worked
because it did not impair the prestige of unionism. But precisely because it left the popularity of unionism untouched, it could work
only for a short time. Union leaders learned to distinguish between
nominal wage rates and real wage rates. Today their policy aims
at raising real wage rates. They can no longer be cheated by a drop
in the monetary unit's purchasing power. Devaluation has worn out
its usefulness as a device for reducing institutional uncmployment.
Cognizance of these facts provides a key for a correct appraisal of
the role which Lord Keynes's doctrines played in the years betwccn
the first and second World Wars. Keynes did not add any new idea
to the body of inflationist fallacies, a thousand times refuted by
economists. His teachings were even more contradictory and inconsistent than those of his predecessors who, like Silvio Gesell, were
dismissed as monetary cranks. He merely knew how to cloak the plea
for inflation and credit expansion in the sophisticated terminology
of mathematical economics. T h e interventionist writers were at a loss
to advance plausible arguments in favor of the policy of reckless
spending; they simply could not find a case against the economic
theorem concerning institutional unemployment. In this juncture
they greeted the "Keynesian Revolution'' with the verses of Wordsworth: "Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, but to be young was
very heaven." ' It was, howevcr, a short-run heaven only. W e may
admit that for the British and American governments in the 'thirties
no way was left other than that of currency devaluation, inflation and
credit expansion, unbalanced budgets, and deficit spending. Governments cannot free themselves from the pressure of public opinion.
They cannot rebel against the preponderance of generally accepted
ideologies, howevcr fallacious. But this does not excuse the officeholders who could resign rather than carry out policies disastrous
for the country. Still less does it excuse authors who tried to provide
2 %rGn!d-be sciendfic jfisgfiC2tiGr?
fnr the
af ~ 1 1r"rusaL
nrrnnlor taxfollacies, viz., inflationism.
a-

5 . Credit Expansion
It has been pointed out that it would be an error to look upon credit
expansion exclusively as a mode of government interference with the
market. The fiduciary media did not come into existence as instru4. Cf. P. A. Samuelson, "Lord Keynes and the General Theory," Econometrics,
74 (1946), 187; reprinted in T h e New Economics, ed. S. E. Harris (New York,
1947). p. 745.

788
Human Action
ments of govcrnment policies deliberately aiming at high prices and
high nominal wage rates, at lowering the market rate of intercst and
at debt abatement. T h e y evolved out of the regular business of banking. When the bankers, whose receipts for call money deposited were
dealt with b y the pubIic as money-substitutes, began to lend a part
of the funds deposited with them, they had nothing else in view than
their own business. T h e y considered it harmless not to keep the whole
equivalent of the receipts issued as a cash reserve in their vaults. T h e y
were confident that they would always be in a position to comply
with their obligations and, without delay, redeem the notes issued
even if they mere to lcnd a part of the d~posits.Banknotes became
fiduciary media within the operation of the unhampered market
cconorny. T h e begetter of credit expansion was the banker, not the
authority.
But today credit expansion is an exclusive prerogative of government. As far as private banks and bankers are instrumental in issuing
fidnciary media, their role is mcrely ancillary and concerns only
technicalities. The governments alone direct t h e course of affairs.
T h e y have attained full supremacy in all matters concerning the
size of circulation credit. While the size of the credit expansion that
private banks and bankers are able to engineer on an unhampered
market is strictly limited, the governments aim at the greatest possible amount of credit expansion. Credit expansion is the government's
foremost tool in their struggle against the market economy. In their
hands it is the magic wand designed to conjure awav the scarcity of
capital goods, to lower the rate of interest or to abolish it altogether,
to finance lavish government spending, to expropriate the capitalists,
to contrive everIasting booms. and to make-evervbody prosperous.
T h e inescapable consequences of credit expansion are shown by the
theory of the trade cycle. Even those economists who still refuse to
acknowledge the correctness of the monetary or circulation credit
theory of the cyclical fluctuations of business have never dared to
cneaio:: h e concl~sivenessand Irrcfutabiliw of what this theory
1
asserts with regard to the necessary effects of credit expansion. These
economists too must admit and do admit that the upswing is invariably
conditioned b y credit expansion, that it could not come into being
and continue -without credit expansion, and that it turns into depression when the further progress of credit expansion stops. Their
explanation of the trade cycle in fact boils down to the assertion
that what first generates the upswing is not credit expansion, but
other factors. T h e credit expansion which even in their opinion is
an indispensable requisite of the general boom, is, they say, not the

Currency and Credit Adanipulation
outcome of a policy deliberately aiming at low interest rates and at
encouraging additiona1investment for which the capital goods needed
are lacking. It is something which, without active interference on the
part of the authorities, in a miraculous way always appears whenever
these other factors begin their operation.
It is obvious that these economists contradict themselves in opposing
plans to eliminate the fluctuations of business by abstention from
credit expansion. The na'ive supporters of the inflationist view of
history are consistent when they infer from their--of course, utterly
fallacious and contradictory-tenets that credit expansion is the economic panacea. But those who do not deny that credit expansion is
an indispensable condition of the boom, disagree with their own
doctrinc in fighting the proposals to curb credit expansion. Both the
spokesn~enof the governments and the powerful pressure groups and
the champions of the dogmatic "unorthodoxy" that dominates the
university departments of economics agree that one should try to
avert the recurrcnce of depressions and that the realization of this end
requires the prevention of booms. They cannot advance tenable arguments against the proposals to abstain from policies encouraging credit
expansion. But they stubbornly refuse to listen to any such idea. They
passionately disparage the plans to prevent credit expansion as devices
which would perpetuate depressions. This attitude clearly demonstratcs the correctness of the statcmcnt that the trade cycle is the
product of policies intentionally aimed at lowering the rate of interest
and engendering artificial booms.
It is a fact that today measures aimed at lowering the rate of interest are gcnerally considered highly desirable and that credit expansion is viewed as the efficacious means for the attainment of this
end. It is this prcpossession that impels all governments to fight the
gold standard. Expamionism is the great slogan of our day. All political
parties and all pressure groups are firmly committed to an easy money
p01icy.~
The n- - I h- - - i- ' ~- r t i r rOf~
exp2nsiGfis m fa~.rCr the interests ef seFse
groups of the population at the expense of others. This is, of course,
5. If a bank does not expand circulation credit by issuing additional fiduciary
media (either in the form of banknotes o r in the form of deposit currency), it
cannot generate a boom even if it lowers the amount of interest charged below
the rate of the unhampered market. I t merely makes a gift to the debtors. T h e
inference to be drawn from the monetary cycle theory by those who want to
prevent the recurrence of booms and of the subsequent depressions is not that
the banks should not lower the rate of interest, but that they should abstain from
credit expansion. Professor Haberler (Prosperity and Depression, pp. 65-66) has
completely failed to grasp this primary point, and thus his critical remarks are
vain.

790

Human Action

the best that interventionism can attain when it does not hurt the interests of all groups. But while malting the whole community poorer,
it may still enrich some strata. Which groups belong to the latter class
depends on the special data of each case.
The idea which generated what is called qualitative credit control
is to channel the additiona1 credit in such a way as to concentrate the
alleged blessings of credit expansion upon certain groups and to
withhold them from other groups. The credits should not go to the
stock exchange, it is argued, and should not make stock prices soar.
They should rather benefit the "legitimate productive activity" of
the processing industries, of mining, of LLlegitimate
commerce," and,
first of all, of farming. Other advocates of qualitative credit control
want to prevent the additional credits from being used for investment
in fixed capital and thus immobilized. They are to be used, instead,
for the production of liquid goods. According to these plans thc
authorities give the banks concrete directions concerning the types
of loans they should grant or are forbidden to grant.
However, all such schemes are vain. Discrimination in lending is
no substitute for checks placed on credit expansion, the only means
that could really prevent a rise in stock exchange quotations and an
expansion of investment in fixed capital. Thc mode in which the
additional amount of credit finds its way into the loan market is
only of secondary importance. What matters is that there is an inflow
of newly created credit. If the banks grant more credits to the farmers, the farmers are in a position to repay loans received from other
sources and to pay cash for their purchases. If they grant more
credits to business as circulating capital, they free funds which were
previously tied up for this use. In any case they create an abundance
of disposable money for which its owners try to find the most profitable investment. Very promptly these funds find outlets in the stock
exchange or in fixed investment. The notion that it is possible to pursue
a credit expansion without making stock prices rise and fixcd investmeat exI?---'
a u u 13 au3uld.'
:--"---T h e typical course of events under credit expansion was until a
few years ago determined by two facts: that it was credit expansion
under the gold standard, and that it was not the outcome of concerted
action on the part of the various national governments and the central
banks whose conduct these governments directed. The first of these
facts meant that governments were not prepared to abandon the
convertibility of their country's banknotes according to the rigidly
fixed parity. The second fact resulted in a lack of quantitative uni6. Cf.Machlup, The Stock Market, Credit and Capital Formation, pp. 2 5 6 2 6 1 .

Czirrelzcy and Credit Manipulation

791

formity in the size of credit expansion. Some countries got ahead of
other countries and their banks were faced with the danger of a
serious external drain upon their reserves in goId and foreign cxchange. In order to preserve their own solvency, these banks were
forced to take recourse to drastic credit restriction. Thus they
created the panic and inaugurated the depression on the domestic
market. The panic very soon spread to other countries. Businessnlen
in these other countries became frightened and increased their borrowing in order to strengthen their liquid funds for all possible evenrs.
Tt was precisely this increased demand for new credits which impelled the monetary authorities of their own countries, alrcady
alarmed by the crisis in the first country, also to resort to contraction.
'Shus within a few days or weeks the depression became an international phenomenon.
The policy of devaluation has to some cxtcnt altered this typical
sequence of events. Menaced by an external drain, the monetary
authorities do not resort to credit restriction and to raising the rate
of intcrest charged by the central banking system. They devalue.
Yet devaluation does not solve the problem. If the government does
not care how far foreign exchange rates may rise, it can for some time
continue to cling to credit expansion. But one day the crack-up boom
will annihilate its monetary system. On the other hand, if the authority
wants to avoid the necessity of devaluing again and again at an accelerated pace, it must arrange its domestic credit policy in such
a way as not to outrun in credit expansion the other countries against
which it wants to keep its domestic currency at par.
Many economists take it for granted that the attempts of the
authorities to expand credit will always bring about the same almost
regular alternation between periods of booming trade and of subsequent depression. They assume that the effects of credit expansion
will in the future not differ from those that have been observed since
the end of the eighteenth century in Great Britain and since the
middle of the nineteenth century in \Vestern and Central Europe
and in North America. But wc may wonder whether conditions have
not changed. T h e teachings of the monetary theory of the trade cycle
are today so well known even outside of the circle of economists, that
the nai've optimism which inspired the entrepreneurs in the boom
periods of the past has given way to a certain skepticism. It may be
that businessmen will in the future react to credit expansion in a manner other than they have in the past. It may be that they will avoid
using for an expansion of their operations the easy money available
because they v17iIlkeep in mind the inevitable end of the boom. Some

792

Human Action

signs forebode such a change. But it is too early t o make a positive
statement.

The Chimera of Contracyclical Policies
An essential element of the "unorthodox" doctrines, advanced both by
all socialists and by all interventionists, is that the recurrence of depressions
is a phenomenon inherent in the very operation of the market economy.
But while the socialists contend that only the substitution of socialism for
capitalism can eradicate the evil, the interventionists ascribe to the government the power to correct the operation of the market economy in such a
way as to bring about what they call "econon~icstability." These interventionists would be right if their antidepression plans were to aim at a
radical abandonment of credit expansion policies. However, they reject
this idea in advance. What they want is to expand credit more and more
and t o prevent depressions by the adoption of special "contracyclical"
measures.
In the context of these plans the government appears as a deity that
stands and works outside the orbit of human affairs, that is independent
of the actions of its subjects, and has the power to interfere with these
actions from without. It has at its disposal means and funds that are not
provided by the people and can be freely used for whatever purposes the
rulers are prepared to employ them for. What is needed to make the
most beneficent use of this power is mereIy to foIlow the advice given by
the experts.
T h e most advertised among these suggested remedies is contracyclical
timing of public works and expenditure on public enterprises. The idea is
not so new as its champions would have us believe. When depression came,
in the past, public opinion always asked the government to embark upon
public works in order to create jobs and to stop the drop in prices. But the
problem is how to finance these public works. If the government taxes the
citizens or borrows from them, it does not add anything to what the
Keynesians call the aggregate amount of spending. It restricts the private
citizen's power to consume or to invest to the same extent that it increases
its own. If, however, the government resorts to the cherished inflationary
methods of financing, it makes things worse, not better. It may thus delay
for a short time the outbreak of the slump. But when the unavoidable
payoff does come, the crisis is the heavier the longer the government has
postponed it.
T h e interventionist experts are at a loss to grasp the real problems involved. As they see it, the main thing is "to plan public capital expenditure
well in advance and to accumulate a shelf of fully worked out capital
projects which can be put into operation at short notice." This, they say,
"is the right policy and one which we recommend all countries should
adopt." However, the problem is not to elaborate projects, but to pro7. Cf. League of Nations, Economic Stability in the Post-War World, Report
of the Delegation on Economic Depressions, PC.I1 (Geneva, 1945)~p. 173.

Czfrrency and Credit i2laniplation

793

vide the materia1 means for their execution. The interventionists believe
that this could be easily achieved by holding back government expenditure in the boom and increasing it when the depression comes.
Now, restriction of government expenditure may certainly be a good
thing. But i t does not provide the funds a government needs for a later
expansion of its expenditure. An individual may conduct his affairs in this
way. H e may accumulate savings when his income is high and spend them
later when his income drops. But it is different with a nation or all nations
together. T h e treasury may hoard a considerable part of the lavish revenue from taxes which flows into the public exchequer as a result of
the boom. As far and as long as it withholds these funds from circulation,
its policy is really deflationary and contracyclical and may to this extent
weaken the boon] created by credit expansion. But when these funds are
spent again, they alter the money relation and crcate a cash-induced tendency toward a drop in the monetary unit's purchasing power. By no means
can these funds provide the capital goods required for the execution of
the shelved public works.
T h e fundamental error of the interventionists consists in the fact that
they ignore the shortage of capital goods. In their eyes the depression is
merely caused by a mysterious lack of the people's propensity both to
consume and to invest. While the only real problem is to produce more
and t o consume less in order to increase the stock of capital goods available, the interventionists want to increase both consumption and investment. They want the government to embark upon projects which are
unprofitable precisely because the factors of production needed for their
execution must be withdrawn from other lines of employment in which
they would fulfill wants the satisfaction of which the consumers consider
more urgent. They do not realize that such public works must considerably intensify the real evil, the shortage of capital goods.
One could, of course, think of another node for the employment of the
savings the government makes in the boom period. T h e treasury could
invest its surplus in buying large stocks of all those materials which it will
later, when the depression comes, need for the execution of the public
works planned and of the consumers' goods which those occupied in these
public works will ask for. But if the authorities were to act in this way,
they would considerably intensify the boom, accelerate the outbreak of
the crisis, and make its consequences more serious."
-411 this talk about contracyclical government activities ai~nsat one goal
only, namely, to divert the public's attention from cognizance of the real
8. In dealing with the contracyclical policies the interventionists always refer
to the alleged success of these policies in Sweden. It is true chat public capital
expenditure in Sweden was actually doubled between 1932 and 1939. But this was
not the cause, but an effect, of Sweden's prosperity in the 'thirties. This prosperity
was entirely due to the rearmament of Germany. This Nazi policy increased the
German demand for Swedish products on the one hand and restricted, on the
other hand, German competition on the worId market for those products which
Sweden could supply. Thus Swedish exports increased from 1932 to 1938 (in
thousands of tons): iron ore from 2,219 to 12,485; pig iron from 31,047 to 92,980;

794
Hunzarz Action
cause of the cyclical fluctuations of business. All governments are firmly
committed to the policy of low interest rates, credit expansion, and inflation. When the unavoidable aftermath of these short-term policies
appears, they know only of one remedy-to go on in inflationary ventures.
6. Foreign Exchange Control and Bilateral
Exchange Agreements
If a government fixes the parity of its domestic credit or fiat money
against gold or foreign exchange at a higher point than the marketthat is, if it fixes maximum prices for gold and foreign exchangc below the potential market price-the effects appear which Gresham's
Law describes. A state of affairs results which-very inadequatelyis called a scarcity of foreign exchange.
I t is the characteristic mark of an economic good that the supply
available is not so plentiful as to make any intended utilization of it
possible. An object that is not in short supply is not an economic good;
no prices are asked for it or paid for it. As money must necessarily
be an economic good, the notion of a money that would not be scarce
is absurd. What those governments who complain about a scarcity
of foreign exchange have in mind is, however, something different.
It is the unavoidablc outcome of thcir policy of price fixing. It means
that at the price arbitrarily fixed by the government demand exceeds
supply. If the government, having by means of inflation reduced the
purchasing power of the domestic monetary unit against gold, foreign
exchange, and commodities and services, abstains from any attempt
at controlling foreign exchange rates, there cannot be any question of
a scarcity in thc sense in which the government uses this term. H e who
is ready to pay the market price would be in a position to buy as much
foreign exchange as he wants.
But the government is resolved not to tolerate any rise in foreign
exchangc rates (in terms of the inflated domestic currency). ReIying upon its magistrates and constables, it prohibits any dealings in
foreign exchange on terms different from the ordained maximum
price.
As the government and its satellitcs see it, the rise in foreign exchange rates was caused by an unfavorable balance of payments and by
ferro-alloys from 15,453to 28,605; other kinds of iron and steel from 134,237 to
256,146; machinery from 46,230 to 70,605. The number of unemployed applying
for relief was r 14,000 in 1932 and 165,000 in 1933. It dropped, as soon as German
rearmament came into full swing, to 115,oooin 1934, to 62,000 in 1935, and was
16,000 in r938. The author of this "miracle" was not Keynes, but Hitler.

Currerzcy and Credit Manipulation

795

the purchases of speculators. In order to remove the evil, the government resorts to measures restricting the demand for foreign exchange.
Only those people should henceforth have the right to buy foreign
exchange who need it for transactions of which the government approves. Commodities the importation of which is superfluous in the
opinion of the government should no longer be imported. Pavment
of interest and principal on debts due to foreigners is
Citizens must no longer travel abroad. T h e government does not realize
that such measures can never "improve" the halance of payments.
If imports drop, exports drop concomitantly. The citizens who are
prevented from buying foreign goods, from paying back foreign
debts, and from traveling abroad, will not keep the amount of
domestic money thus left to them in their cash holdings. They will
increase their buying either of consumers' or of producers' goods and
thus bring about a further tendency for domestic prices to rise. But
the more prices rise, the more will exports be checked.
N o w the government goes a step further. I t nationalizes foreign
exchange transactions. Every citizen who acquires-through
exporting, for example-an amount of foreign exchange, is bound to
sell it at the official rate to the office of foreign exchange control. If
this provision, which is tantamount to an export duty, were to be
effectively enforced, export trade would shrink greatly or cease altogether. T h e government certainly does not like this result. But
neither does it want to admit that its interference has utterly failed to
achieve the ends sought and has produced a state of affairs which is,
from the government's own point of view, much worse even than the
previous state of affairs. So the government resorts to a makeshift.
I t subsidizes the export trade to such an extent that the losses which
its policy inflicts upon the exporters are compensated.
On the other hand, the government bureau of foreign exchange
control, stubbornly clinging to the fiction that foreign exchange rates
have not "real1y"'risen and that the official rate is an effective rate,
sells foreign exchange to importers at this official rate. If this policy
w-cre to be really followed, it would be equivalent to paying bonuses
to the merchants concerned. They would reap windfall profits in
selling the imported commodity on the domestic market. Thus the
authority resorts to further makeshifts. I t either raises import duties
or levies special taxes on thc importers or burdens their purchases of
foreign exchange in some other way.
Then, of course, foreign exchange control works. But it works only
because it virtually acknowledges the market rate of foreign exchange.
T h e exporter gets for his proceeds in foreign exchange the official

796
Human Action
rate plus the subsidy, which together equal the market rate. T h e
importer pays for foreign exchange the official rate plus a special
premium, tax, or duty, which together equal the market rate. T h e
only people who are too dull to grasp what is really going on and let
themselves be fooled by the bureaucratic terminology, are the authors
of books and articles on new methods of monetary management and
on new monetary experience.
T h e n~ono~olization
of buying and selling of foreign exchange by
the government vests the control of foreign trade in the authorities.
It does not affect the determination of foreign exchange rates. I t does
not matter whether or not the government makes it illegal for the
press to publish the real and effective rates of foreign exchange. As
far as foreign trade is still carried on, only these real and effective rates
are in force.
In order to conceaI better the true state of affairs, governments are
intent upon eliminating all reference t o the real foreign exchange rate.
Foreign trade, they think, should no longer be transacted b y the
intermediary of money. It should be barter. T h e y enter into barter
and clearing. agreements with foreign governments. Each of the two
contracting countries should sell t o the other country a quantity of
goods and services and receive in exchange a quantity of other goods
and services. In the text of these treaties any reference to the real market rates of foreign exchange is carefully avoided. However, both
parties caIculate their sales and their purchases in terms of the world
market prices expressed in gold. These clearing and barter agreements
substitute bilateral trade between two countries for the triangular or
multilateral trade of the liberal age. But they in no way affect the fact
that a country's national currency has lost a part of its purchasing
power against gold, foreign exchange, and commodities.
As a policy of foreign trade nationalization, foreign exchange
control is a step on the way toward a substitution of socialism for the
market economy. From any other point of view it is abortive. I t can
certainly neither in the short run nor in the long run affect the determination of the rate of foreign exchange.

Remarks About the Nazi Barter Agreements
The barter and clearing agreements which the Nazi Government of the
Rcich conchded with various foreign countries have been misinterpreted
by the vast literature on the subject. As these misinterpretations are the
basis of many current errors concerning monetary problems, it seems
expedient to devote a few remarks to them.

Cwrency and Cwdit Manipulation

797

The considerations which motivated foreign governments to enter into
such agreements with the Reich were not uniform. Neither were the
political and economic consequences of these agreements homogeneous.
W e may deal with the problems involved by discussing first the case of
the agreement with Switzerland and then those with the countries of the
European southeast.
The Swiss banks had, before Hitler seized power, lent comparatively
enormous sums t o German business. Moreover, one of Switzerland's main
industries, tourism, depended t o a great extent on German patrons. The
German foreign exchange control laws gave the German authorities the
power to prohibit all payments to Swiss banks and to prevent Germans
from visiting the country. The clearing agreement was the only means for
the Swiss to salvage at least a part of their German assets and to induce
the Reich to permit a limited number of Germans to spend a holiday in
the Swiss hotels.
The case of the Balkan agreements is even more interesting as their
meaning was srill more distorted by misinterpretation.
Let us look at an example. The Reich and one of the southeastern countries of Europe-we may call it Balkania--concluded an agreement concerning the mutual exchange of commodities, which could be bought or
sold on the world market for 20 million dollars. Balkania had to give a
world-market value of 10 million dollars in food and raw materials, Germany had to give a world-market value of 10 million dollars in manufactured goods. The pcculiar feature of the bargain was that these commodities bought and sold were in the terms of the contract not valued
according to their world-market price, but a t a higher rate, let us say 10
per cent above the prices of the world market. For the goods Germany had
to buy, Balkania was charged I I million instead of 10, but on the other hand
Balkania was credited for the goods it sold with I I million instead of 10.
This overvaluation was totally, or at least to a great extent, concealed in
the rate of exchange between the Reichsmark and the balkan, the monetary unit of Balkania's currency system, which the barter agreement fixed
at a level different from the actual rate of exchange.
Let us assume that the dollar was actually worth 10 balkans on the world
market. By virtue of the barter agreement, Balkania sold to Germany food
and raw materials for which English businessmen offercd roo million
balkans, for I 10 million, and bought manufactured goods which she could
buy from English or American exporters for IOO million balkans, for I 10
million.
Tn order to understand the meaning of this strange proccdure, we have
to realize that the loss and the gain from these overvaluations compensated
each other onIy for the whole nations, but not for the individual citizens.
For socialist Germany, where under Hitler all business was nationalized,
this made no difference at all. But in Balkania domestic production and
domestic trade were still based on privatc ownership; only the foreign
trade of Balkania was controlled by the government. There it was of great

Human Action

798

consequence that those burdened by the ovcrvaluation of the imported
goods and those favored by the overvaluation of the exported goods were
not the same people. The terms of the barter agreement resulted, therefore, in a shift of income from some goups of citizens (of course, the
black sheep of the government) to other groups of citizens (of course, the
government's pet children). T h e government of Balkania distributed the
boon of the transaction in this way:

r. Higher prices paid to the producers of the exported food
and raw materials
5 million
2 . Gains (legal and illegal) of the government agency entrusted with the execution of the barter agreement and of the
I million
"friends" of the government managing it
4 million
3. Gains retained by the treasury
T h e losses of the transaction, on the other hand, were distributed in this
way:
r. Higher prices of imported commodities paid by those who
I million
were favored by the higher prices of the exported goods
5 million
z. Higher prices of imported goods paid by other citizens
3. Higher prices of imported goods paid by the government
4 million
(e.g., for arms, railroad equipment, etc.)
It is obvious that the friends of the government and the peasants producing
food and raw materials realized gains of 5 million, whereas the nonagricultural sections of the population were burdened with 5 million additional
expenditure. Such an effect was in line with Balkania's whole econonlic
policy; like many other contemporary governments, the rulers of Balkania
made every effort to favor the agricultural section of the population at the
expense of the nonagricultural section.
T h e political consequences of these agreements were twofold: Balkania's government became dependent on the Reich, but its power at home
increased. T h e government now disposed of a fund which could be used
for the benefit of its friends, who were on the payroll of the company or
government agency entrusted with the execution of the barter agreement.
nn

IVIULC.UVGL)

A,

LLIG

,.-.,-,.....

+..-

EVYLLIIIIILIIL

LA

lldU

.,.,,

+
L,
,+
A:~,~;~;..,+~
L L I L YU W L L C V UIJLIIIIIIIIaCb

nrrn;nrt

a6alll-c

thnco
C I I V a r

groups of the peasantry who did not support the government or who were
members of a linguistic or religious minority. T h e products which had to
be exported to Germany were purchased only from the sympathetic
producers. T h e nonsympathisers were barred from the enjoyment of the
benefits of the treaty; they had to sell their entire crop at the lower prices
corresponding to the world market prices. In Yugoslavia, for instance, the
Catholic Croat peasants complained that the government purchased only
from Serbs. It is impossible to discover whether this complaint was really
well founded; in any case, the Croats did not blame the Nazis, they blamed
the Yugoslavian government.

Currency and Credit Manipulation

799

The barter agreements gave Germany a kind of monopoly of the trade
with the countries of southeastern Europe which could not fail to link
these countries politically with the Rcich. From the Nazi point of view,
this practice meant a skillful use of the domestic economic antagonisms
within these countries for the achievement of their own political ends.
T o the governments of the Balkan states, these barter agreements offered
an opportunity of initiating a policy favoring the farming class at the
expense of the nonagricultural classes. What the industrial countries of
Western and Central Europe achieved by tariffs and other measures discriminating against the products of foreign agriculcurc and what the
United States achieved by some of the agricultural measures of the New
Deal, was in Rumania, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia achieved by the
barter treaties with Germany.
Faced with the problem of this German economic offensive in the Balkans, Great Britain was helpless. It had t o withdraw from markets where it
could buy only at prices higher than those in other countries. Consequently, the governments of the Balkan countries concerned declared that
there were no pounds available for the payment of imports from Great
Britain and refused to grant import licenses. Cotnmerce between Great
Britain and these countries was severely restricted.
The same was no less true with regard to all other countries of Western
Europe and of America.
Such was the true nature of these much talked about clearing agreements which were hailed by many authors as the dawn of a new age of
monetary management.

XXXII. CONFISCATION AND REDISTRIBUTION
I.

T h e Philosophy of Confiscation

is guided by the idea that interfering with property rights does not affect the size of production. T h e most na'ive
manifestation of this faIlacy is presented by confiscatory interventionism. T h e yield of production activities is considered a given magnitude independent of the merely accidental arrangements of society's
social order. T h e task of the government is seen as the "fair" distribution of this national income among the various members of society.
T h e interventionists and the socialists contend that all commodities
are turned out by a social process of production. When this process
comes to an end and its fruits ripen, a second social process, that of
distribution of the yield, follows and alIots a share to each. T h e characteristic feature of the capitalist order is that the shares allotted are
unequal. Some people-the entrepreneurs, the capitalists, and the
landowners-appropriate to themselves more than they should. Accordingly, the portions of other people are curtailed. Government
should by rights expropriate the surplus of the privileged and distribute
it among the underprivileged.
N o w in the market economy this alleged dualism of two independent processes, that of production and that of distribution, does not
exist. There is only one process going on. Goods are not first produced and then distributed. There is no such thing as an appropriation
of portions out of a stock of ownerless goods. T h e products come
:"+- L A I J
a-:'.+n"nn ,.- .-,,--L,.A.7?,"+-- T C /...,. -.,"..+"
.+, A:"+..:L...+"
+LeLLIILL d J JVIIILLIUU
Y 3 l IL1I.V.
i , 1 1 U l l G W L L L l L a LIJ U I 3 L L l L J U L C L11G11I3
one must first confiscate them. I t is certainly very easy for the governnlentaI apparatus of compulsion and c o e r c i o ~to embark upon confiscation and expropriation. But this does not prove that a durable
system of economic affairs can be built upon such confiscation and
expropriation.
When the Vikings turned their backs upon a community of
autarkic peasants whom they had plundered, the surviving victims
began to work, to till the soil, and to build again. When the pirates
returned after some years, they again found things to seize. But

I

NTERVENTIOXISM

JllLll

JI\J

Co~z/iscntian a n d Redistribution

80 I

capitalism cannot stand such reiterated predatory raids. Its capital accumulation and investnlents are founded upon the expectation that no
such expropriation u.ill occur. If this expectation is absent, people \\.ill
prefer to consume their capital instead of safeguarding it for the
expropriators. This is the inherent error of all plans that aim at cotnlining private oumrship and rciterntcd e~propriation.

'I'he social reforniers of older da).s ainlecl at the establishnient of
a cotlimunit\: of autarkic fanners only. . l h shares of' land alfottcd to
each member \\.ere to be equal. In the iinagiilation of these ~~topians
there is no room for division of labor and specializ~tionin processing
trades. It is a serious mistake to call such a social order agrarian socialimz. I t is rnerely a juxtaposition of econoniicallv self-sufficient houscholds.
In the lr~arlteteconoiny the soil is a Ineatis of production Iilw any
other material factor of production. Plans aiming at a more or less
c c p l distribution of the soil among the farnling population arc, under
the conditions of the market economy, merely plans for granting
privileges to a group of less efficient producers at the expense of the
immense majority of consumers. T h e operation of the market tends
t o diminate all t l k e farmers whose cost of production is higher than
the marginal costs needed for the production of that amount of farm
products the consumers are ready to buy. It determines the size of
the farms as well as the methods of production applied. If the government interferes in order to make a different arrangement of the conditions of farming prevail, it raises the average price of farm products.
If under competitive conditions m farmers, each of them operating
a 1,000-acrc farm, produce all those farm products the consumers are
ready t o acquire, and the government interferes in order t o substitute 5
~nfarmers, each of them operating a zoo-acre farm, for 7n, the previous number of farmers, the consumers foot the bill.
It is vain to justify such land reforms b y referring to natural law
and othcr metaphysical ideas. The simple truth is that they enhance
the price of agricultural products and that they also impair nonagricultural production. As more manpower is needed t o turn out a unit
of farm produce, more people are employed in farming and less are
left for the processing industries. T h e total amount of commodities
available for consumption drops and a certain group of people is
favored at the expense of the majority.

802

Human Action
3. Confiscatory Taxation

Today the main instrument of confiscatory interventionism is
taxation. It does not matter whether the objective of estate and income taxation is the allegedly social motive of equalizing wealth and
income or whether the primary motive is that of revenue. What alone
counts is the resulting effect.
T h e average man looks at the problems involved with unveiled
envy. Why should anybody be richer than he himself is? T h e lofty
moralist cbncea~shis resentment in philosophical disquisitions. H e
argues that a man who owns ten millions cannot be made happier by
an increment of ninety millions more. Inversely, a man who owns a
hundred millions does not feel any impairment of happiness if his
wealth is reduced to a hare ten millions only. T h e same reasoning holds
good for excessive incomes.
T o judge in this way means to judge from an individualistic point
of view. T h e yardstick applied is the supposed sentiments of individuals. Yet the problems involved are social problems; they must be appraised with regard to their social consequences. What matters is
neither the happiness of any Croesus nor his personal merits or demerits; it is society and the productivity of human effort.
A law that prohibits any individuai from accumulating more than
ten millions or from making more than one million a year restricts
the activities of prccisely those entrepreneurs who arc most successful in filling the wants of consumers. If such a law had been enacted
in thc United States fifty years ago, many who are multimillionaires
today would live in more modest circukstances. But all those new
branches of industry which supply the masses with articles unheard
of before would operate, if at all, -on a much smaller scale, and their
products would be beyond the reach of the common man. I t is manifestly contrary to the interest of the consumers to prevent the most
efficient entrepreneurs from expanding the sphere of their activities
the
..;hi& rjIe m
r
r ~ h l i rgnnrnvec
-rrA--- ~f their ~ o n d i j c tof
business by buying their products. Here again the issue is who should
be supreme, the consumers or the government? In the unhampered
market the behavior of consumers, their buying or abstention from
buying, ultimately determines each individual's income and wealth.
Should one vest in the government the power to overrule the consumers' choices?
The incorrigible statolatrist objects. In his opinion what motivates
the activities of the great entrepreneur is not the lust for wealth, but
the lust for power. Such a "royal merchant" would not restrict his
1-p

-ST--

Confiscation and Redistribution

803

activities if he had to deliver all the surplus earned to the tax collector.
His lust for power cannot he weakened by any considcrations of
mere money making. Let us, for the sake of argument, accept this
psychology. But on what else is the power of a businessman founded
than on his wealth? How would Rockefeller and Ford have been in a
position to acquire "power" if they had been prevented from acquiring wealth? After all, those statolatrists are on comparatively better
grounds who want to prohibit the accumulation of wealth precisely
because it gives a man economic p0wer.l
Taxes are necessary. But the system of discriminatory taxation universally accepted unher the misleading name of progressive taxation
of income and inheritance is not a mode of taxation. It is rather a mode
of disguised expropriation of the successful capitalists and entrepreneurs. Whatever the govcrnments' satellites may advance in its
favor, it is incompatible with the preservation of the marltet economy.
I t can at best be considered a means of bringing about socialism.
Looking backward on the evolution of income tax rates from the
beginning of the Federal income tax in 19s 3 until the present day,
one can hardly believe that the tax will not soon absorb loo per cent
of a11 surplus above the customary level of a labor-union leader's
salary.
Economics is not concerned with the spurious metaphysical doctrines advanced in favor of tax progression, but with its repercussions
on the operation of the market economy. T h e interventionist authors
and politicians look at the problems involved from the angle of their
arbitrary notions of what is "socially desirable." As they see it, "the
purpose of taxation is never to raise moncy," since the govcrnmcnt
"can raise all the money it needs by printing it." The true purpose
of taxation is "to leave less in the hands of the taxpayer." ?
Economists approach the issue from a differcnt angle. They ask
first: what are the effects of confiscatory taxation on capital accumulation? The greater part of that portion of the higher incomcs which
is taxed away would have been used for the accumulation of additional capital. If the treasury employs the proceeds for current expenditure, the result is a drop in the amount of capital accumulation.
The same is valid, even to a greater extent, for death taxes. They force
the heirs to sell a considcrable part of the testator's estatc. This capital
is, of course, not destroyed; it merely changes ownership. But the
I. There is no need to emphasize again that the use of the terminology of
political rule is entirely inadequate in the treatment of economic problems. See
above, pp. 272-273.
2. Cf. A. B. Lerner, The Economics of Control, Principles of Welfare Economics (New York, I%), pp. 307-308.

804
Human Action
savings of the purchasers, which are spent for the acquisition of the
capital sold by the heirs, would have constituted a net increment in
capital available. Thus the accumulation of new capital is slowed
down. The realization of technological improvement is impaired; the
quota of capital invested per worker employed is reduced; a check is
placed upon the rise in the productivity of labor and upon the concomitant rise in real wage rates. It is obvious that the popular belief
that this mode of confiscatory taxation harms only the immediate
victims, the rich, is false.
If capitalists are faced with the likelihood that the income tax or
the estate tax will rise to roo per cent, they will prefer to consume
their capital funds rather than to preserve them for the tax collector.
Confiscatory taxation results in checking economic progress and
improvement not only by its effect upon capital accumulation. It
brings about a general trend toward stagnation and the preservation
of business practices which could not last under thc competitive conditions of the unhampered market economy.
It is an inherent feature of capitalism that it is no respecter of
vested interests and forces every capitalist and entrepreneur to adjust
his conduct of business anew each day to the changing structure of
the market. Capitalists and entrepreneurs are never free to relax. As
long as they remain in business they are never granted the privilege of
quietly enjoying the fruits of their ancestors' and their own achievements and of lapsing into a routine. If they forget that their task is
to serve the consumers to the best of their abilities, they will very
soon forfeit their eminent position and wiIl be thrown back into the
ranks of the common man. Their leadership and their funds are continually chaIlenged by newcomers.
Every ingenious man is free to start new business projects. He may
be poor, his funds may be modest and most of them may be borrowed.
But if he fills the wants of consumers in the best and cheapest way,
he will succeed by means of "excessive" profits. H e pIoughs back
the greater part of his profits into his business, thus making it grow
rapidly. It is the activity of such enterprising parvenus that provides
the market economy with its "dynamism." These nouveaux riches
are the harbingers of economic improvement. Their threatening competition forces the old firms and big corporations either to adjust their
conduct to the best possible service of the public or to go out of
business.
But today taxes often absorb the greater part of the newcomer's
L'ex~e~si~e
profits.
" H e cannot accumulate capital; he cannot expand
his own business; he will never become big business and a match for

Confiscation and Redistribution

805

the vested interests. T h e old firms do not need t o fear his competition;
they are sheltered by the tax collcctor. T h e y may with impunity indulge in routine, thcy may defy the wishcs of the public and become
conscrvative. It is true, thc income tax prevents them, too, from accumulating new capital. But what is rnorc important for them is that
i t prevents the dangerous newcomer from accumulating any capital
T h e y are virtually privileged b y thc tax system. In this sense progrcssive taxation checks economic progress and makcs for rigidity. While
under unhampered capitalism the ownership of capital is a liability
forcing the owner to serve the consumers, modern net hods of taxation
transform it into a privilcgc.
T h e interventionists complain that big business is getting rigid and
bureaucratic and that it is no longer possible for competent newcomers t o challenge the vested interests of the old rich families.
Howevcr, as far as thcir coimplaints are justified, they complain about
things which arc merely the result of their own policics.
Profits are the driving force of the market economy. The greater
the profits, the better the necds of the consumers are supplied. For
profits can only be reaped b y removing discrepancies bctwecn the
demands of thc consumers and the previous state of production
activities. H e who scrves the public best, makes thc highest profits.
In fighting profits governments deliberatcly sabotage thc operation of
the markct economy.

Confiscatory Taxation and Risk-Taking
A popular fallacy considers entrepreneurial profit a reward for risktaking. It looks upon the entrepreneur as a gambler who invests in a lottery after having weighed the favorable chances of winning a prize against
the unfavorable chances of losing his stake. This opinion manifests itself
most clearly in the description of stock-exchange transactions as a sort of
gambling. From the point of view of this widespread fable, the evil caused
by confiscatory taxation is that it disarranges the ratio bctwecn the favorable and the unfavorable chances in the lottery. The prizes are cut down,
while the unfavorable hazards remain unchanged. Thus capitalists and
entrepreneurs are discouraged from embarking upon risky ventures.
Every word in this reasoning is false. The owner of capital does not
choose between more risky, less risky, and safe investments. He is forced,
by the very operation of the market economy, to invest his funds in such
a way as to supply the most urgent needs of the consumers to the best
possible extent. If the methods of taxation resorted to by the government
bring about capital consumption or restrict the accumulation of new
capital, the capital required for marginal employments is lacking and an
expansion of investment which would have been effected in the absence

806

H u m n Action

of these taxes is prevented. The wants of the consumers are satisfied to a
lesser extent onIy. But this outcome is not caused by a reluctance of capitalists to take risks; it is caused by a drop in capital supply.
There is no such thing as a safe investment. If capitalists were to behave
in the way the risk fable describes and were to strive after what they consider to be the safest investment, their conduct would render this line of
investment unsafe and they would certainly lose their input. For the
capitalist there is no means of evading the law of the market that makes it
imperative for the investor to comply with the wishes of the consumers
and t o produce all that can be produced under the given state of capital
supply, technological knowledge, and the valuations of the consumers. A
capitalist never choses that investment in which, according to his understanding of the future, the danger of losing his input is smallest. He chooses
that investment in which he expects to make the highest possible profit.
Those capitalists who are aware of their own lack of ability to judge
correctly for themselves the trend of the market do not invest in equity
capital, but lend their funds to the owners of such venture capital. They
thus enter into a sort of partncrship with those on whose better ability to
appraise thc conditions of the market they rely. It is customary to call
venture capital risk capital. However, as has been pointed out, the success
or failure of the investment in preferred stock, bonds, debentures, mortgages, and other loans depends ultimately also on the same factors that
determine success or failure of the venture capital invested.3 There is no
such thing as independence of the vicissitudes of the market.
If taxation were to strengthen the supply of loan capital at the expense
of the supply of vcnture capital, it would make the gross market rate of
interest drop and at the same time, by increasing the share of borrowed
capital as against the share of equity capital in the capital structure of the
firms and corporations, render the investment in loans more uncertain.
The process would therefore be self-liquidating.
The fact that a capitalist as a rule does not concentrate his investments,
both in common stock and in loans, in one enterprise or one branch of
business, but prefers to spread out his funds among various classes of investment, does not suggest that he wants to reduce his "gambling risk."
H e wants EO imprnve his chances of earning profits.
Nobody embarks upon any investment if he does not expect to make a
good investment. hTobody deliberately chooses a malinvestment. It is only
the emergence of conditions not properly anticipated by the investor that
turns an investment into a malinvestment.
As has been pointed out, there cannot be such a thing as noninvested
~apital.~
The capitalist is not free to choose between investment and noninvestment. Neither is he free to deviate in the choice of his investments
from the lines determined by the most urgent among the yet unsatisfied
3. Cf. above, pp. 536537.
4. Cf.above, pp. 518-520.

Confiscation and Redistribution.
wants of the consumers. He must try to anticipate these future wants correctly. Taxes may reduce the amount of additional capital available or
even bring about consumption of capital previously accumulated. But
they do not affect the employment of capital available, whatever its
quantity may be.
With an excessive height of the income and estate tax rates for the very
rich, a capitalist may consider it the most advisable thing to keep all his
funds in cash or in bank balances not bearing any interest. He consumes
part of his capital: pays no income tax and reduces the inheritance tax
which his heirs will have to pay. But even if people really behave this
way, their conduct does not affcct the employment of the capital available.
It affects prices. But no capital good remains uninvested on account of it.
And the operation of the market pushes investment into those lines in
which it is expected to satisfy the most urgent not yet satisfied demand of
the buying public.

XXXIII. SYNDICALISM AND CORPOKAI'IVLSM
I.

The Syndicalist Idea

HE term syndicalism

is used to signify two entirely different
things.
Syndicalism, as used by the partisans of Georges Sorel, means special
revolutionary tactics to be resorted to for the realization of socialism.
Labor unions, it implies, should nor waste their strength in the task
of improving the conditions of wage earners within the frame of
capitalism. They should adopt action dirccte, unflinching violence
to destroy all the institutions of capitalism. They should never cease
to fight-in the genuine sense of the term-for their ultimate goal,
socialism. T h e proletarians must not let themselves be fooled by the
catchwords of the bourgeoisie, such as liberty, democracy, representative government. They must seek their salvation in the class struggle,
in bloody revolutionary upheavals and in the pitiless annihilation of
the bourgeois.
This doctrine played and still plays an enormous role in modern
politics. I t has provided essential ideas to Russian Bolshevism, Italian
Fascism, and German Nazism. But it is a purely political issue and
may be disregarded in a catallactic analysis.
T h e second meaning of the term syndicalism refers to a program
of society's economic organization. While socialism aims at the substitution of government ownership of the means of production for
private ownership, syndicalism wants to give the ownership of the
plants to the workers employed in them. Such slogans as "The raiIroads to the railroadmen" or "The mines to the miners" best indicate
the ultimate goals of syndicalism.
T h e ideas of socialism and those of syndicalism in the sense of action
directe were developed b y intellcctuals whom consistent adepts of all
Marxian sects cannot help describing as bourgeois. But the idea of
syndicalism as a system of social organization is a genuine product of
the "proletarian mind." I t is precisely what the naive employee considers a fair and expedient means for improving his own material well
being. Eliminate the idle parasites, the entrepreneurs and capitalists,

T

Syndicalism and Corporativism

809

and give their "unearned incomes" to the workers! Nothing could be
simpler.
If one were to take these plans seriously, one would not have to
deal with them in a discussion of the problems of interventionism.
One would have to realize that syndicalism is neither socialism, nor
capitalism, nor interventionism, but a system of its own different from
these three schemes. However, one cannot take the syndicalist program seriously, and nobody ever has. hTobody has been so confused
and injudicious as to advocate syndicalism openly as a social system.
Syndicalism has played a role in the discussion of economic issues only
as far as certain programs unwittingly contained syndicaIist features.
There are elements of syndicalism in certain objectives of government and labor-union interference with market phenomena. There
are, moreover, guild socialism and corporativism, which pretcnded
to avoid the governmcnt omnipotence inherent in all socialist and
interventionist ventures by adulterating them with a syndicalist admixture.
2.

The Fallacies of Syndicalism

The root of the syndicalist idea is to be seen in the belief that entrepreneurs and capitalists are irresponsible autocrats who are free to
conduct their affairs arbitrarily. S~zcha dictatorship must not be
tolerated. The liberal movement, which has substituted representative
government for the despotism of hereditary kings and aristocrats,
must crown its achievements by substituting "industrial democracy"
for the tyranny of heredimry capitalists and entrepreneurs. The economic revohtion must bring to a climax the liberation of the people
which the political revolution has inaugurated.
The fundamental error of this argument is obvious. The entrepreneurs and capitalists are not irresponsible autocrats. They are
unconditionally subjcct to the sovereignty of the consumers. T h e
market is a consumers' democracy. The syndicalists want to transform
it into a producers' democracy. This idea is fallacious, for the sole end
and purpose of production is consumption.
What the syndicalist considers the most serious defect of the capitalist system and disparages as the brutality and callousness of autocratic
profit-seekers is precisely the outcome of the supremacy of the consumers. Under the competitive conditions of the unhampered marker
economy the entrepreneurs are forced to improve technological
methods of production without regard to the vested interests of the
workers. The employer is forced never to pay workers more than
corresponds to the consumers' appraisal of their achievements. If an

810

Human Action

employee asks for a raise because his wife has borne him a new baby
and the employer refuses on the ground that the infant does not
contribute to the factory's effort, the employer acts as the mandatary
of the consumers. These consumers are not prepared to pay more for
any commodity merely because the worker has a large family. The
naivete of the syndicalists manifests itself in the fact that they would
never concede to those producing the articles which they themselves
are using the same privileges which they claim for themselves.
The syndicalist principle requires that the shares of every corporation should be taken away from "absentee ownership" and be
equally distributed among the employees; payment of interest and
principal of debts, is to be discontinued. "Management" will then
be placed in the hands of a board elected by the workers who are
now also the shareholders. This mode of confiscation and redistribution will not bring about equality within the nation or the world. It
would give more to the employees of those enterprises in which the
quota of capital invested per worker is greater and less to those in
which it is smaller.
Jt is a characteristic fact that the syndicalists in dealing with these
issues always refer to management and never mention cntrepreneurial activities. As the average subordinate employee sees things,
all that is to be done in the conduct of business is to accomplish those
ancillary tasks which are entrusted to the managerial hierarchy within
the frame of the entrepreneurial plans. In his eyes the individual plant
or workshop as it exists and operates today is a permanent establishment. It will never change. It w-ill always turn out the same products.
He ignores completely the fact that conditions are in a ceaseless flux,
and that the industrial structure must be daily adjusted to the solution of new problems. His world view is stationary. It does not allow
for new branches of business, new products, and new and better
methods for manufacturing the old products. Thus the syndicalist
ignores the essential problems of entrepreneurship: providing the
capital for new industries and the expansion of already existing industries, restricting branches for the products demand for which
drops, technological improvement. It is not unfair to call syndicalism
the economic philosophy of short-sighted people, of those adamant
conservatives who look askance upon any innovation and are so
hlindcd by envy that they call down curses upon those who provide
them with more, better, and cheaper products. They are like patients
who grudge the doctor his success in curing them of a malady.

S y ndicalisnz and Corporativism
3. Syndicalist Elements in Popular Policies
The popularity of syndicalism manifests itself in various postulates
of contemporary economic policies. T h e essence of these policies is
always to grant privileges to a minority group at the expense of the
inlmense majority. They invariably result in impairing the wealth
and income of the majority.
Many labor unions are intent upon restricting the number of workers employed in their field. While the public wants more and cheaper
books, periodicals and newspapers, and would get them under the
conditions of an unhampered labor market, the typographical unions
prevent many newcomers from working in printing offices. The
effect is, of course, an increase in the wages earned b y the union
members. But the corollary is a drop of wage rates for those not
admitted and an enhancement in the price of printed matter. The
same effect is brought about by union opposition to the utilization
of technological improvements and by all sorts of featherbedding
practices.
Radical syndicalism aims at entirely eliminating payment of dividends to shareholders and of interest to creditors. The interventionists
in their enthusiasm for middle-of-the-road solutions want to appease
the syndicalists by giving the employees a part of the profits. Profitsharing is a very popular slogan. There is no need to enter anew into
an examination of the fallacies implied in the underlying philosophy.
I t suffices to show the absurd consequences to which such a system
must lead.
I t may sometimes be good policy for a small shop or for an enterprise employing highly skiIled workers, to grant an extra bonus to
employees if business is prosperous. But it is a non sequitur to assume
that what under special conditions may be wise for an individual
firm could work satisfactorily as a general system. There is no reason why one welder should make more money because his employer
earns high profits and another welder less because his employer earns
lower profits or no profits at all. T h e workers themselves would rebel
against such a method of remuneration. It could not be preserved even
for a short time.
A caricature of the profit-sharing scheme is the ability-to-pay principle as recently introduced into the program of American labor
unionism. While the profit-sharing scheme aims at an allocation to
the employees of a part of profits already earned, the ability-to-pay
scheme aims at a distribution of profits which some external observers
believe the employer may earn in the future. T h e issue has been

812

Human Actio~t

obfuscated by the fact that the Truman Administration, after having
acccpted the new union doctrine, announced that it was appointing
a "fact-finding" board which would have the authority to examine
the books of the employers in order to determine their ability to
pay an increase in wages. However, the books can provide information
only about past costs and proceeds and past profits and losses. Estimates of future volume of production, future sales, future costs, or
future profits or losses are not facts, but speculative anticipations.
There are no facts about future pr0fits.l
There cannot be any question of realizing the syndicalist ideal
according to which the proceeds of an enterprise should completely
go to the employees and nothing should be left for interest on the
capital invested and profits. If one wants to abolish what is called
"unearned income," one must adopt socialism.

4. Guild Socialism and Corporativism
The ideas of guild socialism and corporativism originated from two
different lines of thought.
The eulogists of medieval institutions long praised the eminence
of the guilds. What was needed to wash away the alleged evils of the
market economy was simply to return to the wcll-tried methods of
the past. However, all these diatribes remained sterile. The critics
never attempted to particularize their suggestions or to elaborate definite plans for an economic reconstruction of the social order. The
most they did was to point out the alleged superiority of the old
quasi-representative assemblies of the type of the French EtatsGE'ne'rauxand the German Standische Landtage as against the modern
parliamentary bodies. Rut even with regard to this constitutional
issue their ideas were rather vague.
The second source of guild socialism is to be found in specific
political conditions of Grcat Britain. When the conflict with Germany
became aggravated and finally in 1914led to war, the younger British
sociaIists began to fee1 uneasy about their program. The state idolatry
of the Fabians and their glorification of German and Prussian institutions was paradoxical indeed at a time when their own country was
involved in a pitiless struggle against Germany. What was the use of
fighting the Germans when the most "progressive" intellectuals of
the country longed for the adoption of German social policies? Was
it possible to praise British liberty as against Prussian bondage and
I . Cf. F. R. Fairchild, Profits and the Ability to Pay Wages (Irvington-onHudson, 1 9 4 6 ) ~
p. 47.

Syndicalism and Corporativism

8 13

at the same time to recommend the methods of Bismarck and his
successors? British socialists yearned for a specifically British brand
of socialism as different as possible from the Teutonic brand. The
problem was to construct a socialist scheme without totalitarian state
supremacy and omnipotence, an individualistic variety of collectivism.
The solution of this problenl is no less impossible than that of the
construction of a triangular square. Yet the young men of Oxford
confidently tried to solve it. They borrowed for their program thc
name guild socialisnz from the littlc known group of the eulogists of
the Middle Ages. They characterized their scheme as industrial selfgovernment, an economic corollary of the most renowned principle
of English political rule, local government. In their plans they assigned
the leading role to the most powerful British pressure group, the
trade unions. Thus they did everything to make their device palatable
to their countrymen.
However, neither these captivating adornments nor the obtrusive
and noisy propaganda could mislead intelligent people. The plan was
contradictory and blatantly impracticable. After only a few years it
feIl into complete oblivion in the country of its origin.
But thcn came a resurrection. The ItaIian Fascists badly needed an
economic program of their own. After having seceded from the international partics of Marxian socialism, they could no longer pose as
socialists. Neither were they, the proud scions of the invincible Roman
legionaries, prepared to make concessions to Western capitalism or to
Prussian interventionism, the counterfeit ideologies of the barbarians
who had destroyed their glorious empire. They were in search of
a social philosophy, purely and exciusively Italian. Whether or not
they knew that their gospeI was merely a replica of British guild
socialism is immaterial. At any rate, the stato corporatiz~owas nothing
but a rebaptized edition of guild socialism. The differences concerned
only unimportant details.
Corporativism was flamboyantly advertised by the bombastic propaganda of the Fascists, and the success of their campaign was overwhelming. Many foreign authors exuberantly praised the miraculous
achievements of the new system. The governments of Austria and
Portugal emphasized that they were firmly committed to the noble
ideas of corporativism. The Pope's encyclical Quadragesirno anno
( 193I ) contained passages which could-but need not-be interpreted as an endorsement of corporativism. A t any rate Catholic
authors sapported this interpretation in books which were published
with the imprimatur of the Church authorities,

8x4

Human Action

Yet neither the Italian Fascists nor the Austrian and Portuguese
governments ever made any serious attempt to realize the corporativist utopia. The Italians attached to various institutions the label
corporativirt and transformed the university chairs of political economy into chairs of economia politica e corporativa. But never was
there any question of the much talked about essential feature of corporativism, self-government of the various branches of trade and
industry. The Fascist Government clung first to the same principles
of economic policies which all not outright socialist governments
have adopted in our day, interventionism. Then Iater it turned step
by step toward the German system of socialism, i.e., all-round state
control of economic activities.
T h e fundamental idea both of guild socialism and of corporativism
is that every branch of business forms a monopolistic body, the guild
or co~porazione.~
This entity enjoys full autonomy; it is free to settle
all its internal affairs without interference of external factors and of
people who are not themselves members of the guild. The mutual
relations between the various guilds are settled by direct bargaining
from guild to guild or by the decisions of a general assembly of the
delegates of all guilds. In the regular course of affairs the government does not interfere at all. Only in exceptional cases, when an
agreement between the various guilds cannot be attained, is the state
called in.3
In drafting this scheme the guild socialists had in mind the conditions of British local government and the relation between the various
local authorities and the central government of the United Kingdom.
They aimed at self-government of each branch of industry; they
wanted, as the Webbs put it, "the right of self-determination for each
vocation." In the same way in which each municipality takes care
of its local community affairs and the national government handles
only those affairs which concern the interests of the whole nation,
the guild alone should have jurisdiction over its internaI affairs and the
government should restrict its interference to those things which the
guilds themselves cannot settle.
However, within a system of social cooperation under the division
z. The most elaborate description of guild socialism is provided by Sidney and
Beatrice Webb, A Constitution for the Socialist Commonwealth of Great Britain
(London, 1920); the best book on corporativism is Ugo Papi, Lezioni di
Economia Generale e Corporativa, Vol. I11 (Padova, 1934).
3. Mussolini declared on January 13, 1934, in the Senate: "Solo in un second0
tempo, quando le categorie non abbiano trovato la via dell' accord0 e dell' equilibrio, lo Stato potrh intervenire." (Quoted by Papi, op. cit., p. 225.)
4. Sidney and Beatrice Webb, op. cit., pp. 277 ff.

Syndicalism and Corporativism

815

of labor there are no such things as matters of concern only to those
engaged in a special plant, enterprise, or branch of industry and of no
concern to outsiders. There are no internal affairs of any guild or
corporazione the arrangement of which does not affect the whole
nation. A branch of business does not serve only those who are occupied in it; it serves everybody. If within any branch of business there
is inefficiency, a squandering of scarce factors of production, or a
reluctance to adopt the most appropriate methods of production,
everybody's material interests are hurt. One cannot leave decisions
concerning the choice of technological methods, the quantity and
quality of products, the hours of work, and a thousand other things
to the members of the guild, because they concern outsiders no less
than members. In the market economy the entrepreneur in making
such decisions is unconditionally subject to the law of the market.
H e is responsible to the consumers. If he were to defy the orders of
the consumers, he would suffer losses and would very soon forfeit
his entrepreneurial position. But the monopolistic guild does not need
to fear competition. It enjoys the inalienable right of exclusively
covering its field of production. It is, if left alone and autonomous,
not the servant of the consumers, but their master. I t is free to resort
to practices which favor its members at the expense of the rest of
the people.
It is of no importance whether within the guild the workers alone
rule or whether and to what extent the capitalists and the former
entrepreneurs cooperate in the management of affairs. I t is likewise
without importance whether or not some seats in the guild's governing board are assigned to representatives of the consumers. What
counts is that the guild, if autonomous, is not subject to pressure that
would force it to adjust its operations to the best possible satisfaction
of the consumers. It is free to give the interests of its members precedence over the interests of consumers. There is in the scheme of
guild socialism and corporativism nothing that would take into account the fact that the only purpose of production is consumption.
Things are turned upside down. Production becomes an end in itself.
When the American New Deal embarked upon the National Recovery Administration scheme, the government and its brain trust
were fully aware of the fact that what they planned was merely the
establishment of an administrative apparatus for full government
control of business. The short-sightedness of the guild socialists and
corporativists is to be seen in the fact that they believed that the
autonomous guild or corporazione could be considered a device for
a working system of social cooperation.

816

Human Action

It is very easy indeed for each guild to arrange its allegedly internal
affairs in such a way as to satisfy its members fully. Short hours of
work, high wage rates, no further improvements in tcchnoIogica1
methods or in the quality of the products which could inconvenience
the members-very well. But what will the result be if all guilds resort to the same policies?
Under the guild system there is no longer any question of a market.
There are no longer any prices in the catalIactic setise of the term.
There are neither competitive prices nor monopoly prices. Those
guilds which monopolize the suppIy of vital necessities attain a
dictatorial position. The producers of indispensable foodstuffs and
fuel and the suppliers of electric current and of transportation can
with impunity squeeze the whole people. Does anybody expect that
the majority will tolerate such a state of affairs? There is no doubt
that any attempt to realize the corporarivist utopia would in a very
short time lead to violent conflicts, if the government did not interfere when the vital industries abused their privilcged position. What
the doctrinaires envisage only as an exceptional measure-the interference of the government-will become the rule. Guild socialism and
corporativism will turn into full government control of all production activities. They will develop into that system of Prussian
Zwangswirtschaft which they were designed to avoid.
There is no need to deal with the other fundamental shortcomings
of the guild scheme. It is as deficient as any other syndicalist project.
It does not take into account the necessity of shifting capital and labor
from one branch to another and of establishing new branches of production. It entirely neglects the problem of saving and capital accumulation. In short, it is nonsense.

XXXIV. T H E ECONOMICS O F WAR
I.

Total W a r

market economy involves peaceful cooperation. It bursts
asunder when the citizens turn into warriors and, instead of
exchanging commodities and services, fight one another.
The wars fought by primitive tribes did not affect cooperation
under the division of labor. Such cooperation by and large did not
exist between the warring parties before the outbreak of hostilities.
These wars were unlimited or total wars. They aimed at total victory
and total defeat. The defeated were either exterminated or expelled
from their dwelling places or enslaved. T h e idea that a treaty could
settle the conflict and make it possible for both parties to live in peaceful neighborly conditioqs was not present in the minds of the fighters.
'1-he spirit of conquest does not acknowledge restraints other than
those imposed by a power which resists successfully. T h e principle
of empire building is to expand the sphere of supremacy as far as
possible. T h e great Asiatic conquerors and the Roman Imperators
were stopped onIy when they could not march farther. Then they
postponed aggression for later days. They did not abandon their
ambitious plans and did not consider independent foreign states as
anything else than targets for later onslaughts.
'This philosophy of boundless conquest also animated the rulers of
medieval Europe. They too aimed first of all at the utn~ostexpansion
of the size of their reajms. But the institutions of feudalism provided
t h a n with only scanty means for warfare. lTassalswere not obliged
to fight for their lord more than a limited time. T h e selfishness of the
vassals who insisted on their rights checked the king's aggressiveness.
Thus the peaceful coexistence of a number of sovereign states originated. In the sixteenth century a Frenchman, Bodin, developed the
theory of national sovereignty. In the seventeenth century a Dutchman, Grotius, added to it a theory of international relatibns in war
and peace.
With the disintegration of feudalism, sovereigns could no longer
rely upon summoned vassals. T h e y "nationalized" the country's armed
forces. Henceforth, the warriors were the Icing's mercenaries. The

T

HE

8I 8

Human Action

organization, equipment, and support of such troops were rather
costly and a heavy burden on the ruler's revenues. T h c ambitions of
the princes were unbounded, but financial considerations forced
them to moderate their designs. T h e y no longer planned to conquer a
whole country. All they aimed at was the conquest of a fcw cities
o r of a province. T o attain more would also have been unwise
politically. For the European powers were anxious not to let any
one of them become too powerful and a menace to their own safety.
A too impetuous conqueror must always fear a coalition of all those
whom his bigness has frightened.
T h e combined effect of military, financial, and political circumstances produced the limited warfare which prevailed in Europe in
the three hundred years preceding the French Revolution. Wars were
fought by comparatively small armies of professional soldiers. W a r
was not i n affair of the peoples; it concerned the rulers only. T h e
citizens detested war which brought mischief to them and burdened
them with taxes and contributions. But they considered themselves
victims of events in which they did not participate actively. Even
the belligerent armies respected the "neutrality" of the civilians. As
they saw it, they were fighting the supreme warlord of the hostile
forces, but not the noncombatant subjects of the enemy. In the wars
fought on the European continent the property of civilians was considered inviolable. In 1856 the Congress of Paris made an attempt
to extend this principle to naval warfare. More and more, eminent
minds began to discuss the possibility of abolishing war altogether.
Looking at conditions as they had developed under the system of
limited warfare, philosophers found wars useless. Men arc killed or
maimed, wealth is destroyed, countries are devastated for the sole
benefit of Icings and ruling oligarchies. T h e peoples themselves do
not derive any gain from victory. T h e individual citizens are not
enriched if their rulers expand the size of their realm by annexing a
province. For the people wars do not pay. T h e only cause of armed
conflict is the greed of autocrats. T h e substitution of representative
government for royal despotism will abolish war altogether. Democracies are peaceful. It is no concern of theirs whether their nation's
sovereignty stretches over a larger or smaller territory. Thev will
treat territorial problems without bias and passion. hey wili scttle
them peacefully. W h a t is needed to make peace durable is to dethrone
the despots. This, of course, cannot bc achieved peacefully. It is
necessary to crush the mercenaries of the kings. But this revolutionary
war of the peoples against the tyrants will bc the last war, thc war to
abolish war forever.

T h e Econo~nicsof W a r
This idea was already dimly present in the minds of the French
revolutionary leaders when, after having repelled the invading armies
of Prussia an2 Austria, they embarked upon a campaign of aggression.
Of course, under the leadership of Napoleon they themseIves very
soon adopted the most ruthless methods of boundless expansion and
annexation until a coalition of all European powers frustrated their
ambitions. But the idea of durable peace was soon resurrected. It was
one of the main points in the body of nineteenth-century liberalism
as consistently elaborated in the much abused principles of the Manchester school.
These British liberals and their continental friends were keen enough
t o realize that what can safeguard durable peace is not simply government b y the people, but government b y the people under unlimited laissez faire. In their eyes free trade, both in domestic affairs
and in international relations, was the necessary prerequisite of the
preservation of pcace. In such a world without trade and migration
barriers no incentives for war and conquest are left. Fullv convinced
of the irrefutable persuasiveness of the liberal ideas, they dropped
the notion of the last war to abolish all wars. All peoples will of their
own accord recognize the blessings of free trade and peace and will
curb their domestic despots without any aid from abroad.
Adost historians entirely fail t o recogn& the factors which replaced
the " limited" war of the-ancien rCgime bv the "unlimited" war of our
age. As they see it, the change came with the shift from the dvnastic
t o the national form of state and was a consequence of the ~ r e n c h
Revolution. T h e y look only upon attending phenomena and confuse
causes and effects. T h e y speak of the composition of the armies, of
strategical and tactical principles, of weapons and transportation
facilities, and of manv other mattcrs of military art and administrative technicalities.' Nowever, all these things do not explain w h y
modern nations prefer agsression to pcace.
Therc is pcrfcct agreement with regard t o the fact that total war
is an offshoot of aggressive nationalism. But this is merely circular
reasoning. W e call a&essive nationalism that ideology which makes
for modern total war. Aggressive nationalism is the necessary derivative of the policies of interventionism and national planning. While
laissez faire eIiminates the causes of international conflict, government interference with business and socialism create conflicts for
I . T h e best presentation of the traditional interpretation is provided bv the
book, Makers of Modern Strategy, Military Thought from Machiavelli to Hitler,
ed. E. M . Earle (Princeton University Press, 1944);cf. especially the contribution
of R. R. Palmer, pp. 49-53.

820

Human Action

which no peaceful solution can be found. While under free trade
and freedom of migration no individual is concerned about the territorial size of his country, under the protective measures of economic
nationaIism nearly every citizen has a substantial interest in these
territorial jssucs. T h e enlargement of the territory subject to the
sovereignty of his own government means material improvement
for him or at least relief from restrictions which a foreign government has imposed upon his wcll-being. W h a t has transformed the
limited war betnecn royal armies into total war, the clash between
peoples, is not technicalities of n~ilitaryart, but the substitution of the
welfare state for the laissez-faire state.
If Napoleon I had reached his goal, the French Empire would have
stretched far beyond the limits of r 81 5. Spain and Naples would have
been ruled by k h g s of the house of Bonaparte-Murat instead of kings
of another French family, the Bourbons. T h e palace of Kassel would
have been occupied by a French playboy instead of one of the
egregious Electors of the Hcsse family. All these things would not
have made the citizens of France more prosperous. Neither did the
citizens of Prussia win anything from the fact that their king in I 866
evicted his cousins of Hanover, Hessc-Kassel and Nassau from their
luxurious residences. But if Hitler had realized his plans, the Germans expected to enjoy a higher standard of living. They were
confident that the annihilation of the French, the Poles, and the
Czechs would make every member of their own race richer. The
struggle for more Lebensraurn was thcir own war.
Under laissez faire peaceful coexistence of a multitude of sovereign
nations is possible. Under government control of business it is impossible. T h e tragic error of President Wilson was that he ignored
this essential point. Modern total war has nothing in common with
the limited war of the old dynasties. I t is a war against trade and migration barriers, a war of th; comparatively overpopulated countries
against the comparatively underpopulated. It is a war to abolish those
institutions which prevent the emergence of a tendency toward an
equalization of wage rates all over the world. It is a war of the farmers tilling poor soil against those governments which bar them from
access to much more fertile soil lying fallow. It is, in short, a war of
wage earners and farmers who describe themselves as underprivileged
"have-nots7' against the wage earners and farmers of other nations
whom they consider privileged "haves."
T h e acknowledgment of this fact does not suggest that victorious
wars would really do away with those evils about which the aggressors complain. Neither does it mean that there can be any question

T h e Economics of War

82 I

of appeasing the aggressors by removing migration barriers. As conditions are today, the Americas and Australia in admitting German,
Italian, and Japanese immigrants would merely open their doors to
the vanguards of hostile armies.
It is futile to place confidence in treaties, conferences, and such
bureaucratic outfits as the League of Xations and the United Nations.
Plenipotentiaries, office clerks and experts make a poor show in fighting idcologjes. The spirit of conquest cannot be smothered by red
tape. What is needed is a radical change in ideologies and economic
policies.
2.

W a r and the Market Economy

The market economy, say the socialists and the interventionists, is
at best a system that may be tolerated in peacetime. But when war
comes, such indulgence is impermissible. It would jeopardize the
vital interests of the nation for the sole benefit of the selfish concerns
of capitalists and entrepreneurs. War, and in any case modern total
war, peremptorily rcquires government control of business.
Hardly anybody has been bold enough to challenge this dogma.
It served in both World Wars as a convenient pretext for innumerable
measures of government intcrfercnce with business which in many
countries step by step led to full "war socialism." When the hostilities
ceased, a new slogan was launched. The period of transition from war
to peace and of "reconversion," people contended, requires even
more government control than the period of war. Besides, why should
one ever return to a social system which can work, if at all, only in
the interval between two wars? The most appropriate thing would
be to cling permancntly to government controI in order to be duly
preparcd for any possible emergency.
An examination of the problems which the United States had to face
in the second World War will clearly show how fallacious this
reasoning is.
What America needed in order to win the war was a radical conversion of a11 its production activities. A11 not absolutely indispensable
civilian consumption was to be climinated. The plants and farms were
henceforth to turn out only a miniinurn of goods for nonmilitary use.
For the rest, they were to devote themselves completely to the task
of supplying the armed forces.
The realization of this program did not require the establishment
of controls and priorities. If the government had raised all the funds
needed for thc conduct of war by taxing the citizens and by borrowing from them, everybody would have been forced to cut down his

822

Human Action

consumption drasticalIy. The entrepreneurs and farmers would have
turned toward production for the government bccause the sale of
goods to private citizens would have dropped. The government, now
by virtue of the inflow of taxes and borrowed money the biggest
buyer on the market, would have been in a position to obtain all it
wanted. Even the fact that the government chose to finance a considerable part of the war expenditure by increasing the quantity of money
in circulation and by borrowing from the commercial banks would
not have altered this state of affairs. The inflation must, of course,
bring about a marked tendency toward a rise in the prices of all goods
and services. The government would have had to pay higher nominal
prices. But it would still have been the most solvent buyer on the
markct. It would have been possible for it to outbid the citizens who
on the one hand had not the right of manufacturing the money they
needed and on the other hand would have been squeezed by enormous
taxes.
But the government deliberately adopted a policy which was
bound to make it impossible for it to rely upon the operation of the
unhampered market. It resorted to price control and made it illegal
to raise commodity prices. Furthermore it was very slow in taxing
the incomes swollen by the inflation. It surrendered to the claim of the
unions that the workers' real take-home wages should be kept at a
height which would enable them to preserve in thc war their prewar
standard of living. In fact, the most numerous class of the nation,
the class which in peacetime consumed the greatest part of the total
amount of goods consumed, had so much more money in their pockets
that their power to buy and to consume was greater than in peacetime. The wage earners-and to some extent also the farmers and the
owners of plants producing for the government-would have frustrated the government's endeavors to direct industries toward the
production of war materials. They would have induced business
to produce more, not less, of those goods which in wartime are considered superfluous luxuries. It was this circumstance that forced the
Administration to resort to the systems of priorities and of rationing.
The shortcomings of the methods adopted for financing war expenditure made government control of business necessary. If no
inflation had been made and if taxation had cut down the income
(after taxes) of all citizens, not only of those enjoying higher incomes,
to a fraction of their peacetime revenues, these controls would have
been supererogatory. The endorsement of the doctrine that the wage
earners' real income must in wartime be even higher than in peacetime made them unavoidable.

The Economics of War

823

Not government decrees and the paper work of hosts of people on
the government's payroll, but the efforts of private enterprise produced those goods which enablcd the American armed forces to win
the war and to provide all the ~naterialequipment its allies needed for
their cooperation. The economist does not infer anything from these
historical facts. But it is expedient to mention them as the interventionists would have us believe that a decree prohibiting the employment of steel for the construction of apartment houses automatically
produces airplanes and battleships.
The adjustment of production activities to a change in the demand
of consumers is the source of profits. The greater the discrepancy
between the previous state of production activities and that agreeing
with the new structure of demand, the greater adjustments are required and the greater profits are earned by those who succeed best
in accomplishing these adjustments. The sudden transition from peace
to war revolutionizes the structure of the market, makes radical readjustments indispensable and thus becomes for many a source of
high profits. The planners and interventionists regard such profits
as a scandal. As they see it, the first duty of government in time of
war is to prevent the emergence of new millionaires. It is, they say,
unfair to let some people become richer while other people are killed
or maimed.
Nothing is fair in war. It is not just that God is for the big battalions
and that those who are better equipped defeat poorly equipped adversaries. It is not just that those in the front line shed their life-blood
in obscurity, while the commanders, comfortably located in headquarters hundreds of miles behind the trenches, gain glory and fame.
I t is not just that John is killed and Mark crippled for the rest of his
life, while Paul returns home safe and sound and enjoys all the
privileges accorded to veterans.
It may be admitted that it is not "fair" that war enhances the
profits of those entrepreneurs who contribute best to the equipment
of the fighting forces. But it would be foolish to deny that the profit
system produces the best weapons. It was not socialist Russia that
aided capitalist America with lend-lease; the Russians were lamentably
defeated before American-made bombs fell on Germany and before
they got the arms manufactured by American big business. The most
important thing in war is not to avoid the emergence of high profits,
but to give the best equipment to one's own country's soldiers and
sailors. The worst enemies of a nation are those malicious demagogues
who would give their envy precedence over the vital interests of their
nation's cause.

824

Human Action

Of course, in the long run war and the preservation of the market
economy are incompatible. Capitalism is essentially a scheme for
peaceful nations. But this does not mean that a nation which is forced
to repel foreign aggressors must substitute government control for
private enterprise. If it were to do this, it would deprive itself of the
no st efficient means of defense. There is no record of a socialist nation which defeated a capitalist nation. In spite of their much glorified war socialism, the Germans wcre dcfeated in both World Wars.
What the incompatibility of war and capitalism really means is that
war and high civilization are incompatible. If the efficiency of capitalism is directed by governments toward the output of instruments
of destruction, the ingenuity of private business turns out weapons
which arc powerful enough'to destroy everything. What makes war
and capitalism incompatible with one another is precisely the unparalleled efficiency of thc capitalist mode of production.
T h e market economy, subject to the sovereignty of the individual
consumers, turns out products which make the individual's Iife more
agreeable. I t caters to the individual's demand for rnorc comfort. I t
is this that made capitalism despicable in the eyes of the apostles of
violence. They worshipcd the "hero," the destroyer and killer, and
despised the bourgeois and his "peddler mentality" (Sombart). Now
mankind is reaping the fruits which ripened from the seeds sown by
these men.

3. War and Autarky
If an econon~icallyself-sufficient man starts a feud against another
autarkic man, no specific problems of "war-economy" arise. But if
the tailor goes to war against the baker, he must henceforth produce
his bread for himself. If he neglects to do this, he will be in distress
sooner than his adversary, the baker. For the baker can wait longer
for a new suit than the tailor can for fresh bread. The economic problem of making war is therefore different for thc baker and for the
tailor.
T h e international division of labor was developed under the assumption that there would no longer bc wars. In the philosophy of
the Manchester School free trade and peace wcre seen as mutually
conditiolling one another. T h e businessmen who made trade international did not consider the possibility of new wars.
N o r did general staffs and students of the art of warfare pay any
attention to the change in conditions which international division of
labor brought about. T h e method of military science consists in
examining the experience of wars fought in the past and in abstracting

The Economics of W a r

82j

general ruIes from it. Even the most scrupulous occupation with the
campaigns of Turenne and Napoleon I could not suggest the existence
of a problem which was not present in ages in which there was practically no international division of labor.
T h e European military experts slighted the study of the American
Civil War. In their eyes this war was not instructive. I t was fought by
armies of irregulars led by nonprofessional commanders. Civilians like
I h c o l n interfered with the conduct of the operations. Little, they
believed, could be learned from this experience. But it was in the Civil
W a r that, for the first time, prohlems of the interregional division of
labor played the decisive role. T h e South was predominantly agricultural; its processing industries were negligible. The Confederates
depended on the supply of manufactures from Europe. As the naval
forces of the Union were strong enough to blockade their coast, they
soon began to lack needed equipment.
T h e Germans in both World Wars had to face the same situation.
T h e y depended on the supply of foodstuffs and raw materials from
overseas. But they could not run the British blockade. In both wars
the outcome was decided by the battles of the Atlantic. The Germans
lost because they failed i i their efforts to cut off the British Isles
from access to the u.orld market and could not themselves safe-guard
their own maritime supply lines. T h e strategicaI problem was determined by the conditions of the international division of labor.
T h e German warmongers were intent upon adopting policies
which, as they hoped, could make it possible for Germany to wage
a war in spite of the handicap of the foreign trade situation. Their
panacea was Ersatz, the substitute.
A substitute is a good which is either less suitabIe or more expensive
or both less suitable and more expensive than the proper good which
it is designed to replace. Whenever technology succeeds in manufacturing or discovering something which is either more suitable or
cheaper than the thing previously used, this new thing represents a
techriologicai innovation; ic is improvement and not Ersatz. I ne essentiaI feature of Ersatz, as this term is employed in the economicomilitary doctrine, is inferior quality or higher costs or both t ~ g e t h e r . ~
the German doctrine of the economics
T h e Wehr~~.irtschuftslehre,
of war, contends that neither cost of production nor quality are important in matters of warfare. Profit-seeking business is c'oncerned
with costs of production and with the quality of the products. But

-.

2. In this sense wheat produced, under the protection of an import duty, within
the Reich's territory is Ersatz too: it is produced at higher costs than foreign
wheat. T h e notion of Ersatz is a catallactic notion, and must not be defined with
regard to technological and physical properties of the articles.

826

Hzmnn Action

the heroic spirit of a superior race does not care about such specters
of the acquisitive mind. What counts alone is war preparedness. A
warlike nation must aim at autarky in order to be independent of
foreign trade. It must foster the production of substitutes irrespective
of marnmonist considerations. It cannot do without full government
controI of production because the selfishness of the individual citizens
would thwart the plans of the leader. Even in peacetime the commander-in-chief must be entrusted with economic dictatorship.
Both theorems of the Ersatz doctrine are falIacious.
First, it is not true that the quality and suitability of the substitute
are of no importance. If soldiers are sent into battle badly nourished
and equipped with weapons made of inferior material, the chances for
victory are impaired. Their action will be less successful, and they
will suffer heavier casualties. The awareness of their technical inferiority will weigh on their minds. Ersatz jeopardizes both the
material strength and the rnorale of an army.
AToless incorrect is the theorem that the higher costs of production
of the substitutes do not count. Higher costs of production mean
that more labor and more material factors of production must be
expended in order to achieve the same effect which the adversary,
producing the proper product, attains with a lower expenditure. It
is tantamount to squandering scarcc factors of production, material
and manpower, Such waste under conditions of peace results in lowering the standard of living, and under conditions of war in cutting
down the supply of goods needed for the conduct of operations. In
the present state of technological ltnowledge it is only a slight exaggeration to say that everything can be produced out of anything. But
what matters is to pick out from the great multitude of possible
methods those with which output is highest per unit of input. Any
deviation from this principle penalizes itself. T h e consequences in war
are as bad as they are in peace.
In a country like the United States, which depends only to a
comparatively negligible extent on the importation of raw materials
from abroad, it is possible to improve the state of war preparedness by
resorting to the production of substitutes such as synthetic rubber.
The disadvantageous effects would be small when weighed against the
beneficial effects. But a country like Germany was badly mistaken in
the assumption that it could corkper with synthetic gasoline, synthetic
rubber, Ersatz textiles and Ersatz fats. In both World Wars Germany
was in the position of the tailor fighting against the man who supplies
him with bread. With all their brutality the Nazis could not alter this
fact.

The Economics of W a r

827

4. The Futility of W a r
What distinguishes man from animals is the insight into the advantages that can be derived from cooperation undcr the division of
labor. Man curbs his innate instinct of aggression in order to cooperate with other human bcings. 'The more he wants to improve
his material well-being, the more he must expand the system of the
division of labor. Concomitantly he must more and more restrict the
sphere in which he resorts to military action. The emergence of the
international division of labor requires the total abolition of war. Such
is the essencc of the laissez-faire phiIosophy of Manchestcr.
This philosophy is, of course, incompatible with statolatry. In its
context the statc, the social apparatus of violent oppression, is entrusted with the protection of the smooth operation of the market
economy against the onslaughts of antisocial individuals and gangs.
Its function is indispensable and beneficial, but it is an ancillary function only. There is no reason to idolize the police power and ascribe
to it omnipotence and omniscicnce. There are things which it can
certainly not accomplish. It cannot conjure away the scarcity of the
factors of production, it cannot make people more prosp~rous,it
cannot raise the productivity of labor. All it can achieve is to prevent
gangsters from frustrating the efforts of those people who arc intent
upon promoting materia1 well-being.
The liberal philosophy of Bentham and Bastiat had not yet completed its work of removing trade barriers and government mcddling
with business when the counterfeit theology of the divine state began to take effect. Endeavors to improve the conditions of wage
earners and small farmers by government decree made it necessary to
loosen more and more the ties which connected each country's
domestic economy with thosc of other countries. Economic nationalism, the necessary complement of domestic interventionism, hurts
the interests of foreign peoples and thus creates international conflict. It suggests the idea of amending this unsatisfactory state of affairs
by war. U7hy should a powerfu1 nation tolerate the challenge of a
less powerful nation? Is it not insolence on the part of small Lapputania to injure the citizens of big Ruritania by customs, migration
barriers, foreign exchange control, quantitative trade restrictions,
and expropriation of Ruritanian investments in Lapputania? Would
it not be easy for the army of Ruritania to crush Lapputania's contemptible forces?
Such was the ideology of the German, Italian, and Japanese warmongers. It must be adm'itted that they were consistent from the point

828

Human Action

of view of the new "unorthodox" teachings. Interventionism generates
economic nationalism, and economic nationalism generates bellicosity.
If men and commodities are prevented from crossing the borderlines,
why should not the armies try to pave the way for them?
From the day when Italy, in I 9 I I , fell upon Turkey fighting
was continual. There was airnost always shooting somewhere in the
world. The peace treaties concluded were virtually merely armistice
agreements. Moreover they had to do only with the armies of the
great powers. Some of the smaller nations were always at war. In
addition there were no less pernicious civil wars and revolutions.
How far we are today from the rules of international law developed
in the age of limited warfare! Modern war is merciless, it does not
spare pregnant women or infants; it is indiscriminate killing and
destroying. It does not rcspect the rights of neutrals. Millions are
killed, enslaved, or expelled from the dwelling places in which their
ancestors lived for centuries. Nobody can foretell what will happen
in the next chapter of this endless struggle.
This has nothing to do with the atomic bomb. The root of the
evil is not the construction of new, more dreadful weapons. It is the
spirit of conquest. It is probable that scientists will discover sonle
methods of defense against the atomic bomb. Rut this will not alter
things, it will merely prolong for a short time the process of the
con~pletedestruction of civilization.
Modern civilization is a product of the philosophy of laissez faire.
It cannot be preserved under the ideology of government omnipotence. Statolatry owes much to the doctrines of Hegel. However, one
may pass over many of Hegel's inexcusable faults, for Hegel also
coined the phrase "the futility of victory" (die Ohnrnacht des
S i e g ~ s ) .T~o dcfcat the aggressors is not enough to make peace durable. The main thing is to discard the ideology that generates war.
3. Cf. Hegel, Vorlesungen iiber die Philosophie der Weltgescbicbte, ed. Lasson
(Leipzig, rgto), lV, 93931.

XXXV. T H E WELFARE PRINCIPLE VERSUS

THE MARKET PRINCIPLE
I.

T h e Case Against the Market Economy

HE objections which the various schools of

Sozialpolitik raise
against the market economy are based on very bad economics.
They repeat again and again all the errors that the economists long
ago exploded. They blame the market economy for the consequences
of the very anticapitalistic poIicies which they themselves advocate
as necessary and beneficial reforms. They fix on the market economy
the responsibility for the inevitable failure and frustration of interventionism.
These propagandists must finally admit that the market economy
is after all not so bad as their "unorthodox" doctrines paint it. It delivers the goods. From day to day it increases the quantity and improves the quality of products. It has brought about unprecedented
wealth. But, objects the champion of interventionism, it is deficient
from what he calls the socia1 point of view. It has not wiped out
poverty and destitution. It is a system that grants privileges to a
minority, an upper class of rich people, at the expense of the immense majority. It is an unfair systetn. The principle of welfare must
be substituted for that of profits.
W e may try, for the sake of argument, to interpret the concept of
welfare in such a way that its acceptance by the immense majority
of nonascetic people would be probable. The better we succeed in
these endeavors, the more we dcprive the idea of welfare of any concrete meaning and content. It turns into a colorless paraphrase of the
fundamental category of human action, viz., the urge to rcmove uneasiness as far as possible. As it is universally recognized that this
goal can be more readily, and even exclusively, attained by social
division of labor, men cooperate within the framework of societal
bonds. Social man as differentiated from autarkic man must necessarily modify his original biological indifference to the well-being
of people beyond his own family. H e must adjust his conduct to the
requirements of social cooperation and look upon his fellow men's
success as an indispensable condition of his own. From this point of

T

830
Human Action
view one may describe the objective of socia1 cooperation as the
realization of the greatest happiness of the greatest number. Hardly
anybody would venture to object to this definition of the most desirable state of affairs and to contend that it is not a good thing to see
as many people as possil~leas happy as possible. All the attacks
directed against the Bentham formula have centered around ambiguities or misunderstandings concerning the notion of happiness; they
have not affected the postulate that the good, whatever it may be,
should be imparted to the greatest number.
However, if we interpret welfare in this manner, the concept becomes meaningless. It can be invoked for the justification of every
variety of social organization. It is a fact that some of the defenders
of Ncgro slavery contended that slavery is the best means of making
the Negroes happy and that today in the South many Whites sincerely
believe that rigid segregation is beneficial no less to the colored man
than it allegedly is to the white man. The main thesis of racism of the
Gobineau and Nazi variety is that the hegemony of the superior
races is salutary to the true interests even of the inferior races. A
principle that is broad enough to cover all doctrines, however conflicting with one another, is of no use at all.
But in the mouths of the welfare propagandists the notion of welfare has a definite meaning. They intentionally employ a term the
generally accepted connotation of which precludes any opposition.
No decent man likes to be so rash as to raise objections against the
realization of weIfare. In arrogating to themselves the exclusive right
to call their own program the program of welfare, the welfare propagandists want to triumph by means of a cheap logical trick. They
want to render their ideas safe against criticism by attributing t o
them an appellation which is cherished by everybody. Their terminology already implies that all opponents are ill-intentioned scoundrels
eager to foster their selfish interests to the prejudice of the majority
of good people.
The plight of Western civilization consists precisely in the fact that
serious people can resort to such syllogistic artifices without encountering sharp rebuke. There are only two explanations open.
Either these self-styled welfare economists are themselves not aware
of the logical inadmissibility of their procedure, in which case they
lack the indispensable power of reasoning; or they have chosen this
mode of arguing purposely in order to find shelter for their fallacies
behind a word which is intendcd beforehand to disarm all opponents.
In each case their own acts condemn them.
There is no need to add anything to the disquisitions of the pre-

Welfare Principle Versus Market Principle

831
ceding chapters concerning the effects of a11 varieties of interventionism. T h e ponderous volumes of welfare economics have not brought
forth any arguments that could invalidate our conclusions. The only
task that remains is to examine the critical part of the welfare propagandists' work, their indictment of the market economy.
All this passionate talk of the welfare schooI ultimately boils down
t o three points. Capitalism is bad, they say, because there is poverty,
inequality of incomes and wealth, and insecurity.
2.

Poverty

Wc may depict conditions of a society of agriculturists in which
cvcry member tills a piece of land l u g e enough to provide himself
and his family with the indispensable necessities of life. W e may include in such a picture the existence of a few specialists, artisans like
smiths and professional men like doctors. W e may even go further
and assume that some men do not own a farm, but work as laborers
on other people's farms. The employer remunerates them for their
hclp and takes care of them when sickness or old age disables them.
This schemc of an ideal society was at the bottom of many utopian
plans. It was by and large realized for some timc in some communities.
The nearest approach to its realization was probably the commonweaIth which the Jesuit padres established in the country which is
today Paraguay. There is, however, no need to examine the merits
of s&h a system of social organization. Historical evohtion burst it
asunder. Its frame was too narrow for the number of people who are
living today on the carth's surface.
The inhcrent weakness of such a society is that the increase in
population must result in progressive poverty. If the estate of a deceased farmer is divided among his children, the holdings finally become so small that they can no longer provide sufficient sustenance
for a family. Everybody is a landowner, but everybody is extremely
poor. Conditions as they prevaiI in large areas of China provide a sad
illustration of the misery of the tillers of small parcels. The alternative
to this outcome is the emergence of a huge mass of landless proletarians. Then a wide gap separatcs the disinherited paupers from the
fortunate farmers. They are a class of pariahs whose very existence
presents society with an insoluble problem. They search in vain for
a livelihood. Socicty has no use for them. They are destitute.
When in the ages preceding the rise of modern capitalism the
statesmen, philosophers, and laws referred to the poor and to the
problems of poverty. they meant these supernumerary wretches.

832
Human Action
Laissez faire and its off-shoot, industrialism, converted the ernployable poor into wage earners. In the unhampered market society there
are people with higher and people with lower incomes. Therk are
no longer men who, although able and ready to work, cannot find
regular jobs because there is no room left for them in the social system
of production. But liberalism and capitalism were evcn in their heyday limited to comparatively small areas of Western and Central
Europe, S o r t h America, and Australia. In the rest of the world
hundreds of millions still vegetate on the verge of starvation. They
are poor or paupers in the old sense of the term, supernumerary and
superfluous, a burden to themselves and a latent threat to the minority
of their more lucky fellow citizens.
The penury of these miserable masses of-in the main coloredpeople is not caused by capitalism, but by the absence of capitalism.
But for the triumph of laissez faire, the lot of the peoples of Western
Europe would have been evcn worse than that of the coolies. What
is wrong with Asia is that the per capita quota of capital invested is
extremely low when compared with the capital equipment of the
West. The prevailing ideology and the socia1 system which is its
off-shoot check the evolution of profit-seeking entrepreneurship.
There is very little domestic capital accumulation, and manifest
hostility to foreign investors. In many of these countries the increase
in population figures even outruns the increase in capital available.
It is false to blame the European powers for the poverty of the
masses in their colonial empires. In investing capital the foreign rulers
did all they could do for an improvement in material well-being. It
is not the fault of the Whites that the Oriental peoples are reluctant to
abandon their traditional tenets and abhor capitalism as an alien
ideology. They will very soon have succeeded in freeing themselves
entirely from foreign domination. Then they will probably turn
toward various brands of regimentation and totalitarianism. These
will not solve their economic problems and will not make their masses
more prosperous.
As far as there is unhampered capitalism, there is no longer any
question of poverty in the sense in which this term is applied to the
conditions of a noncapitalistic society. T h e increase in population
figures does not create supernumerary mouths, but additional hands
whose employment produces additional wealth. There are no ablebodied paupers. Seen from the point of view of the economically
bacltward nations, the conflicts between "capital" and "labor" in the
capitalist countries appear as conflicts within a privileged upper class.
In the eyes of an Indian or a Chinese coolie the American automobile

Welfare Principle Versus Market Principle

833

worker is an "aristocrat." H e is a man who belongs to the 2 per cent
of the earth's population whose income is highest. N o t only the
colored races, but also the Slavs, the Arabs, and some other peoples
look upon the average income of the citizens of the capitalistic countries-about r z or I 5 per cent of the total of mankind-as a curtailment of their own material w-ell-being. They fail to realize that the
prosperity of these allegedly privileged groups is, apart from the
effects of migration barriers, not paid for by their own poverty, and
that the main obstacle to the improvement of their own conditions is
their abhorrence of capitalism.
Within the frame of capitalism the notion of poverty refers only
to those people who arc unable to take care of themselves. Even if
we disregard the case of children, we must realize that there will always be such unemployables. Capitalism, in improving the masses'
standard of living, hygienic conditions, and methods of prophylactics
and therapeutics, does not remove bodily incapacity. I t is true that
today many people who in the past would have been doomed to
life-long disability are restored to fulI vigor. But on the other hand
many whom innate defects, sickness, or accidents would have extinguished sooner in earlier days survive as permanently incapacitated
people. Moreover, the prolongation of the average length of life tends
toward an increase in the number of the aged who are no longer able
to earn a living.
The problem of the incapacitated is a specific problem of human
civilization and of society. Disabled animals must perish quickly. They
either die of starvation or fa11 prey to the foes of their species. Savage
man had no pity on those who were substandard. With regard to
them many tribes practiced those barbaric methods of ruthless extirpation to which the Nazis resorted in our time. The very existence of
a comparatively great number of invalids is, however paradoxical,
a characteristic mark of civilization and material well-being.
Provision for those invalids who lack means of sustenance and are
not taken care of by thcir next of kin has long been considered a work
of charity. The funds needed have sometimes been provided by
governments, more often by voluntary contributions. The Catholic
orders and congregations and some Protestant institutions have accomplished marvels in collecting such contributions and in using them
properly. Today there are also many nondenominational establishments vying with them in noble rivalry.
The charity system is criticized for two defects. One is the paucity
of the means available. However, the more capitaIism progresses and
increases wealth, the more sufficient become the charity funds. On

834

Human Action

the one hand, people are more ready to donate in proportion to the
improvement in their own well-being. O n the other hand, the number
of the needy drops concomitantly. Even for those with moderate
incomes the opportunity is offered, by !aving and insurance policies,
to provide for accidents, sickness, old age, the education of their
children, and the support of widows and orphans. I t is highly probable
that the funds of the charitable institutions would be sufficient in
the capitalist countries if interventionism were not to sabotage the
essential institutions of the market economy. Credit expansion and
inflationary increase of the quantity of money frustrate the "common
man's" attempts to save and to accumuIate reserves for less propitious
days. But the other procedures of interventionisn~are hardly less
injurious to the vital interests of the wage earners and salaried employees, the professions, and the owners of small-size business. T h e
greater part of those assisted b y charitable institutions are needy only
because interventionism has made them so. O n the other hand, inflation and the endeavors to lower the rate of interest below the potential market rate virtually expropriate the endowments of hospitals,
asylums, orphanages, and similar establishments. As far as the welfare
propagandists lament the insufficiency of the funds available for
assistance, they lament one of the results of the policies that they
theinselves are advocating.
T h e second defect charged to the charity system is that it is charity
and compassion only. T h e indigent has no claim to the kindness shown
to him. H e depends on the mercy of benevolent people, on the feelings of tenderness which his distress arouses. What he receives is a
voluntary gift for which he must be grateful. T o be an almsman is
shameful and humiliating. I t is an unbearable condition for a selfrespecting man.
These complaints are justified. Such shortcomings do indeed inhere
in a11 kinds of charity. I t is a system that corrupts both givers and
receivers. I t makes thk former self-righteous and the latter submissive
. .
. is.
c-qiiig.
mcnealitj~
of a capitalistic environment that makes people feel the indignity of giving and receiving alms. Outside of the field of the cash nexus and of deals
transacted between buyers and sellers in a purely businesslilte manner,
all interhuman relations arc tainted by the same failing. I t is precisely the absence of this personal element in market transactions that
all those deplore who blame capitalism for hard-heartedness and
callousness. In the eyes of such critics cooperation under the do ut
des principle dehumanizes a11 societal bonds. I t substitutes contracts
for brotherly love and readiness to help one another. These critics

Welfare Principle Versus Market Principle

835

indict the legal order of capitalism for its neglect of the "human
side." They are inconsistcnt when they blame the charity system for
its reliance upon feelings of mercy.
Feudal society was founded on acts of grace and on the gratitude of
those favored. 'The mighty overlord bestowed a benefit upon the
vassal and the latter owed hirn personal fideIity. Conditions were
human in so far as the subordinates had to kiss their superiors' hands
and to show allegiance to them. In a feudal environment the element
of grace inhcrent in charitable acts did not give offense. It agreed with
the generally accepted idcology and practice. It is only in the setting
of a society based entirely upon contractual bonds that the idea
emerged of giving to the indigent a legal claim, an actionable titlc to
sustenance against society.
The metaphysical arguments advanced in favor of such a right to
sustenance are based on thc doctrine of natural right. Before God or
nature all men are equal and endowed with an inalienable right to
live. Eiowever, the reference to inborn equality is certainly out of
place in dealing with the eRects of inborn inequality. I t is a sad fact
that physical disability prevents many people from playing an active
role in social cooperation. I t is the operation of the laws of nature
that makes these people outcasts. They are stepchildren of God or
nature. W e may fully endorse the religious and ethical precepts that
declare it to be man's duty to assist his unlucky brethren whom nature
has doomed. But the recognition of this duty does not answer the
question concerning what methods should be resorted to for its
performance. It does not enjoin the choice of methods which would
endanger society and curtail the productivity of human effort. hTeither
the able-bodied nor the incapacitatcd would derive any benefit from
a drop in thc quantity of goods available.
The problems involvcd arc not of a praxeological character, and
economics is not called upon to providc the best possible solution for
them. They concern pathology and psychology. They refer to the
biological fact that the fear o i penury and of the degrading consequences of being supported by charity are important factors in the
preservation of man's physiolbgica~equilibrium. Thcy impel a man
to keep fit, to avoid sickness and accidents, and to recover as soon as
possible from injuries suffered. The cxpericnce of thc social security
systern, especially that of the oldest scheme, the German, has clearly
shown the undesirable effects resuIting from the elimination of the&
in~entives.~
No civilized community has callously allowed the inI . Cf. Sulzbach, Gennan Experience with Social insurance (New York, 19471,
pp. 22-32.

836

Human Action

capacitated to perish. But the substitution of a legally enforceable
claim to support or sustenance for charitable relief does not seem to
agree with human nature as it is. Not metaphysical prepossessions, but
considerations of practical expediency make it inadvisable to promulgate an actionable right to sustenance.
It is, moreover, an illusion to believe that the enactment of such
laws can free the indigent from the degrading features inherent in
receiving alms. The more openhanded these laws are, the more punctilious must their application become. The discretion of bureaucrats
is substituted for the discretion of people whom an inner voice drives
to acts of charity. MJhether this change renders the lot of those incapacitated any easier, is hard to say.

3. Inequality
The inequality of incomes and wealth is an inherent feature of the
market economy. Its elimination would entirely destroy the market

economy."
What thosc people who ask for equality have in mind is always an
increase in their own power to consume. In endorsing the principle
of equality as a political postulate nobody wants to share his own
income with those who have less. When the American wage earner
refers to equality, he means that the dividends of the stockholders
should be given to him. H e does not suggest a curtailment of his
own income for the benefit of thosc 95 per cent of the earth's population whose income is lower than his.
T h e role that income inequality plays in the market society must
not be confused with the role it plays in a feudal society or in other
types of noncapitalistic societie~.~
Yet in the course of historical evolution this precapitalistic inequality was of momentous importance.
Let us compare the history of China with that of England. China
has developed a very high civilization. T w o thousand years ago it
was far ahead of England. But at the end of the nineteenth century
England was a rich and civilized country while China was poor.
Its civilization did not differ much from the stage it had already
reached ages before. It was an arrested civilization.
China had tried to realize the principle of income equality to a
greater extent than did England. Land holdings were divided and
subdivided. There was no class of landless proletarians. But in eighteenth-century England this class was very numerous. For a very long
Cf. above, pp. 285-286 and pp. 802-804.
3. Cf. above, pp. 308-309.

2.

Welfare Principle Versus Market Principle

837

time the restrictive practices of nonagricultural business, sanctified
by traditional ideologies, delayed the emergence of modern entrepreneurship. But when the laissez-faire philosophy had opened the way
for capitalism by utterly destroying the fallacies of restrictionism,
the evolution of industrialism could proceed at an accelerated pace
because the labor force needed was already available.
What generated the "machine age" was not, as Sombart imagined,
a specific mentality of acquisitiveness which one day mysteriously got
hold of the minds of some people and turned them into "capitalistic
men." There have always been people ready to profit from better
adjusting production to the satisfaction of the needs of the public.
But they were paralyzed by the ideology that branded acquisitiveness
as immoral and erected institutional barriers to check it. T h e substitution of the laissez-faire philosophy for the doctrines that approved of
the traditional system of restrictions removed these obstacles to
material improvement and thus inaugurated the new age.
The liberal phiIosophy attacked the traditional caste system because its preservation was incompatible with the operation of the
market economy. It advocated the abolition of privileges because it
wanted to give a free hand to those men who had the ingenuity to
produce in the cheapest way the greatest quantity of products of
the best quality. In this negative aspect of their program the utilitarians and economists agreed with the ideas of those who attacked the
status privileges from the point of view of an alleged right of nature
and the doctrine of the equality of all men. Both these groups were
unanimous in the support of the principle of the equality of all men
under the law. But this unanimity did not eradicate the fundamental
opposition between the two lines of thought.
In the opinion of the natural law school all men are biologically
equal and therefore have the inalienable right t o an equal share in all
things. The first theorem is manifestly contrary to fact. The second
theorem leads, when consistently interpreted, to such absurdities that
its supporters abandon logical consistency altogether and ultimately
come to consider every institution, however discriminating and iniquitous, as compatible with the inalienable equality of all men. The
eminent Virginians whose ideas animated the American Revolution
acquiesced in the preservation of Negro slavery. T h c most despotic
system of government that history has ever known, Bolshevism, parades as the very incarnation of the principle of equality and liberty
of all men.
The liberal champions of equality under the law were fuIly aware
of the fact that men are born unequal and that it is precisely their

Human Actioa
inequality that generates social cooperation and civilization. Equality
under the law was in their opinion not designed to correct the inexorable facts of the universe and to make natural inequality disappear. It was, on the contrary, the device to secure for the whole of
mankind the maximum of benefits it can derive from it. Hence no
man-made institutions should prevent a man from attaining that station
in which he can best serve his fellow citizens. T h e liberals approached
the problem not from the point of view of alleged inalienable rights
of the individuals, but from the social and utilitarian angle. Equality
under the law is in their eyes good because it best serves the interests
of all. It leaves it to the voters to decide who should hold public office
and to the consumers to decide who should direct production activities. It thus eliminates the causes of violcnt conflict and secures a
steady progress toward a more satisfactory state of human affairs.
T h e triumph of this liberal phiIosophy produced all those phenomena which in their totality are called modern Western civilization.
However, this new ideology could triumph only within an environment in which the ideal of income equality was very weak. If the
Englishmen of the eighteenth century had been prcoccupied with the
chimera of income equality, laissez-faire philosophy would not have
appealed to them, just as it does not appeal today to the Chinese or
the Mohammedans. In this scnse the historian must acknowledge that
the ideological heritage of feudalism and the manorial system contributed to the rise of our modern civilization, howcvcr different it is.
Those eighteenth-century philosophers who were foreign to the
ideas of the new utilitarian theory could still speak of a superiority
of conditions in China and in the Mohammedan countries. They knew,
it is true, very little about the social structure of the oriental world.
What they found praiseworthy in the dim reports they had obtained
was the absence of a hereditary aristocracy and of big land holdings.
As they fancied it, these nations had succeeded better in establishing
equality than their own nations.
Then later in the nineteenth century these claims were renewed
by the nationalists of the nations concerned. The cavalcade was headed
by Panslavism, whose champions exalted the eminence of communal
land tenure as realized in the Russian rnir and artel and in the zadruga
of the Yugoslavs. With the progress of the semantic confusion which
has converted the meaning of political terms into their very opposite,
the epithet "democratic" is now lavishly spent. T h e Moslem peoples,
which never knew any form of governmcnt other than unlimited
absolutism, are called democratic. Indian nationalists take pleasure in
speaking of traditional Hindu democracy!

Welfare Prirzciple Versus Market Principle
Economists and historians are indifferent with regard to all such
emotional effusions. In describing the civilizations of the Asiatics as
inferior civilizations they do not express any value jud,ments. They
merely establish the fact that these peoples did not bring forth those
ideological and institutional conditions which in the West produced
that capitalist civilization the superiority of which the Asiatics today
in~plicitly accept in clamoring at least for its technological and
therapeutical implements and paraphernalia. It is precisely when one
recognizes the fact that in the past the culture of many Asiatic peoples
was far ahead of that of thcir Western contemporaries, that the question is raised as to what causes stopped progress in the East. In the
case of the Hindu civilization the answer is obvious. Here the iron
grip of the inflexible caste system stunted individual initiative and
nipped in the bud every attempt to deviate from traditional standards.
Rut China and the Mohammedan countries were, apart from the
slavery of a comparatively small number of people, free from caste
rigidiiy. They were ruled by autocrats. But the individual subjects
were equal ukder the autocrat. Even slaves and eunuchs were not
barred from acccss to the highest dignities. It is this equality before
the ruler to which people refer today in speaking of the supposed
democratic customs of these Orientals.
T h e notion of the economic equality of the subjects to which these
peoples and their rulers were committed was not well defined but
vague. But it was very distinct in one respect, namely, in utterly condemning the accumuIation of a large fortune by any private individual.
T h e rulers comidered wealthy subjects a threat to their political
supremacy. All people, the rulers as well as the ruled, were convinced
that no man can amass abundant means otherwise than by depriving
others of what by rights should be!ong to them, and that the riches
of the wealthy few are the cause of the poverty of the many. T h e
position of wealthy husinessrnen was in all oriental countries extremely precarious. They were at the mercy of the oficeholders.
Even lavish bribes failed to protect them against confiscation. T h e
whole people rejoiced whenever a prosperous businessman fell victim
to the envy and hatred of the administrators.
This antichrematistic spirit arrested the proqress of civilization in
the East and kept the masses on the verge of starvation. As capital
accumnlation was checked, there could be no auestion of technolopica1 improvement. Capitalism came to the East as an imported
alien ideology, imposed by foreign armies and navies in the shape
either of colonial domination or of extraterritorial jurisdiction. These
violent methods were certainly not the appropriate means to change

840
Human Action
the traditionalist mentality of the Orientals. But acknowledgment of
this fact does not invalidate the statement. that it was the abhorrence
of capital accumulation that doomed many hundreds of millions of
Asiatics to poverty and starvation.
T h e notion of equality which our contemporary welfare propagandists have in mind is the replica of the ~siatic-ideaof equality.
While vague in every other respect, it is very clear in its abomination
of large fortunes. It objects to big business and great riches. It advocates various measures to stunt the growth of individual enterprises
and to bring about more equality by confiscatory taxation of incomes
and estates. And it appeals to the envy of the injudicious masses.
T h e immediate cconomic consequences of confiscatory policies
have been dealt with a l r e a d ~ .It~is obvious that in the long run such
poIicies must result not only in slowjng down or totally checking the
further accumulation of capital, but also in the consumption of capita1
accumulated in previous days. They would not only arrest further
progress toward more rnateiial prosperity, but even reverse the trend
and bring about a tendency toward progressing poverty. The ideals
of Asia would triumph; and finally East and West would meet on an
equal IeveI of distress.
The welfare school pretcnds not only to stand for the interests of
the whole of society as against the selfish interests of profit-seeking
business; it contends moreover that it takes into account the lasting
secular interests of the nation as against the short-term concerns of
speculators, promoters, and capitalists who are exclusively committed
to profiteering and do not bother about the future of the whole of
society. This second claim is, of course, irreconcilable with the
emphasis laid by the school upon short-run policies as against longrun concerns. fiowever, consistency is not one of the virtues of the
welfare doctrinaires. Let us for the sake of argument disregard this
contradiction in their statements and examine them without reference
to their inconsistency.
Saving, capital accumulation, and investment withhold the amount
concerned from current consumption and dedicate it to the improvement of future conditions. The saver foregoes the increase in present
satisfaction in order to improve his own well-being and that of his
family in the more distant future. His intentions are certainly selfish
in the popuIar connotation of the term. But the effects of his selfish
conduct are beneficial to the lasting secular interests of the whole
of society as we11 as of all its members. His conduct produces all
those phenomena to which even the most bigoted welfare propa4. Cf.above, pp. 800-805.

Welfare Principle Versus Market Principle
841
gandist attributes the epithets economic improvement and progress.
The policies advocated by the welfare school remove the incentive
to saving on the part of private citizens. On one hand, the measures
directed toward a curtailment of big incomes and fortunes seriously
reduce or destroy entirely the wealthier people's power to save. On
the other hand, the sums which people with moderate incomes previously contributed to capital accumulation are manipulated in such
a way as to channel them into the lines of consumption. When in the
past a man saved by entrusting money to a savings bank or by taking
out an insurance policy, the bank or the insurance company invested
the equivalent. Even if the saver at a later date consumed the sums
savcd, no disinvestment and capital consumption resulted. The total
investments of the savings banks and the insurance companies steadily
increased in spite of these withdrawals.
Today there prevails a tendency to push the banks and the insurance
companies more and more toward investment in government bonds.
The funds of the social security institutions completely consist in
titles to the public debt. As far as public indebtedness was incurred by
spending for current expenditure, the saving of the individual does
not result in capital accumulation. While in the unhampered market
economy saving, capital accumulation, and investment coincide, in
the interventionist economy the individual citizens7 savings can be
dissipated by the government. The individal citizen restricts his current consumption in order to provide for his own future; in doing this
he contributes his share to the further economic advancement of
society and to an improvement of his fellow men's standard of living.
But the government steps in and removes the socially beneficial effects
of the individuals7 conduct. Kothing explodes better than this example thc welfare clichC that contrasts the selfish and narrow-minded
individual, exclusively committed to the enjoyment of the pleasures
of the moment and having no regard for the well-being of his fellow
men and for the perennial concerns of society, and the far-sighted
benevolent government, unflaggingly devoted to the promotion of the
lasting welfare of the whole of society.
The welfare propagandist, it is true, raises two objections. First,
that the individual's motive is selfishness, while the government is
imbued with good intentions. Let us admit for the sake of argument
that individuals are devilish and rulers angelic. But what counts in
life and reality is-whatever Kant may have said-not good intentions,
but accomplishments. n7hatmakes the existence and the evolution of
society possible is precisely the fact that peaceful cooperation under
the social division of labor in the long run best serves the selfish con-

842
Human Action
cerns of all individuals. T h e eminence of the market society 1s that its
whole functioning and operation is the consummation of this principle.
T h e second objection points out that under the welfare system
capital acoumu2ation by the government and public investment are
to be substituted for private accumulation and investment. I t refers
to the fact that not all the funds which governmcnts borrowed in the
past were spent for current expenditure. A considerable part was
invested in the construction of roads, railroads, harbors, airports,
power stations, and other public works. Another no less conspicuous
part was spent for waging wars of defense which admittedly could
not be financed by other methods. T h e objection, however, misses
the point. What matters is that a part of the individual's saving is employed by government for current consumption, and that nothing
hinders the government from so increasing this part that it in fact
absorbs the whole.
It is obvious that if governmcnts make it in~possiblefor their
subjects to accumulate and t o invest additional capital, responsibiIity
for the formation of new capital, if there is to be any, devolves upon
govcrnment. The welfare propagandist, in whose opinion government
control is a synonym for Cod's providential care that wisely and
imperceptibly leads mankind to higher and more perfect stages of an
inescapable evolutionary progress, fails to see the intricacy of the
problem and its ramifications.
N o t only further saving and accumulation of additional capitaI, but
no less the maintenance of capital at its present level, require curtailing
today's consumption in order to be more amply supplied later. It is
abstinence, a refraining from satisfactions which could be reaped
in~tantly.~
The market economy brings about an environment in
which such abstinence is practiced to a certain extent, and in which
its product, the accumulated capital, is invested in those Iines in which
it best satisfies the most urgent needs of the consumers. T h e questions
arise whether government acculnulation of capital can be substituted
for private accumulation, and in what way a govcrnment would invest additional capital accumulated. These problems do not refer only
to a socialist commonwealth. They arc no less urgcnt in an interven5. T o establish this fact is, t o he sure, not an endorsement of the theories which
tried to describe interest as the "reward" of abstinence. There is in the world of
reality no mythical agency that rewards or punishes. What originary interest
redly is has been shown above in Chapter XIX. But as against the would-be
ironies of Lassalle (Herr Rastiat-Schulze von Delitzsch in Gesan?melte Rcden and
Schriften, ed. Bernstein, V , 1 6 7 ) ~reiterated by innumerable textbooks, it is good
to emphasize that saving is privation (Entbehmng) in so far as it deprives the
saver of an instantaneous enjoyment.

W e l f w e P'rinciple Versus Marhet Principle

843

tionist scheme that has either totally or almost totally removed the
conditions making f o r private capital formation. Even the United
States is manifestly more and more approaching such a state of
affairs.
Let us consider the case of a government that has got control of the
employment of a considerable part of the citizens' savings. T h e investments of the social security system, of the private insurance companies, of savings banks, and of commercial banlrs are to a great extent
determined by the authorities and channeled into the public dcbt.
The private citizens are still savers. But whether or not their savings
bring about capital accumulation and thus increasc thc quantity of
capital goods available for an improvement of the apparatus of production depends on the employment of the funds borrowed by the
government. If the government squanders thcse sums either by spending them for current expcnditure or b y malinvcstment, the process of
capital accun~ulationas inaugurated by the saving of individuals and
continued by the investment operations of the banks and insurance
enterprises is cut off. A contrast between thc two ways may clarify
the matter:
In the process of the unhampered ~narketeconomy Bill saves onc
hundred dollars and deposits it with a savings bank.-1f he is wise in
choosing a bank which is wise in its lending and investing business, an
increment in capital results, and brings about a rise in the productivity
of labor. Out of the surplus thus produccd a part goes to Bill in the
shape of interest. If Bill blunders in the choice of his bank and entrusts
his hundred dollars to a bank that fails, he goes emptyhanded.
In the proccss of government interference with saving and investment, Paul in the year 1940 saves by paying one hundred dollars
to thc national social security instit~tion.~
H e receives in exchange a
claim which is virtually an unconditional government IOU. If the
government spends the hundred dollars for current expenditure, no
additional capital comcs into existence, and no incrcase in the productivity of labor results. The government's IOU is a check drawn upon
the future taxpayers. In 1970 a certain Peter may have to fulfill the
government's promise although he himself does not dcrive any benefit
from thc fact that P a d in 1940 saved one hundred dollars.
Thus it becomes obvious that therc is no need t o look at Soviet
Russia in ordcr to comprehend the rolc that public finance plays in
our day. The trumpery argument that thc public debt is no burden
because "we owe it to ourselves'' is delusive. T h e P a d s of 1940 do not
6. It makes no difference whether Paul himself pays this hundred dollars or
whether the law obliges his employer to pay it. Cf. above, p. 599.

844
Human Action
owe it to themselves. It is the Peters of 1970 who owe it to the Pauls
of 1940.T h e whole system is the acme of the short-run principle. T h e
statesmen of I 940 solve their problems by shifting them to the statesmen of 1970. On that date the statesmen of rgqo will be either dead or
elder statesmen glorying in their wonderful achievement, social
security.
T h e Santa Clam fables of the welfare school are characterized by
their con~pletefailure to grasp the problems of capital. I t is precisely
this defect that makes it imperative to deny them the appellation we/fare economics with which they describe their doctrines. H e who does
not take into consideration the scarcity of capital goods available is not
an economist, but a fabulist. H e does not deal with reality but with a
fabulous world of plenty. All the effusions of the contemporary welfare school are, like those of the socialist authors, based on the implicit
assumption that there is an abundant supply of capital goods. Then,
of course, it seems easy to find a rcmedy for all ills, to give to everybody "according to his needs" and to make everyone perfectly happy.
I t is true that some of the champions of the welfare school feel
troubled by a dim notion of the problems involved. They realize that
capital must be maintained intact if the future productivity of labor is
not to be i r n ~ a i r e d . ~
However, these authors too fail to comprehend
that even the mere maintenance of capital depends on the skillful handling of the problems of investment, that it is always the fruit of successful speculation, and that endeavors to maintain capital intact presuppose economic calculation and thereby the operation of the market
economy. T h e other welfare propagandists ignore the issue completely. It does not matter whether or not they endorse in this respect
the Marxian scheme or resort to the invention of new chimerical notions such as "the self-perpetuating character" of useful t h i n g ~ .In
~
any event their teachings are designed to provide a justification for the
doctrine which blames oversaving and underconsumption for all that
is unsatisfactory and recommends spending as a panacea.
When pushed hard by economists, some welfare propagandists and
socialists admit that impairment of the average standard of living can
only be avoided by the maintenance of capital already accumulated
and that economic improvement depends on accumulation of additional capital. Maintenance of capital and accumulation of ncw capital,
7. This refers especially to the writings of Professor A. C. Pigou, thc various
editions of his book The Economics of Welfare and miscellaneous articles. For a
critique of Professor Pigou's ideas, cf. Hayek, Profits, Interest and Investment
(London, 1939). pp. 83-134.
8. Cf. F. H. Knight, "Professor Miscs and the Theory of Capital," Economica,

VIII (1941)*409-427,

Welfare Principle Versus Market Principle

845
they say, will henceforth be a task of government. They will no
longer be left to the selfishness of individuals, exclusively concerned
with their own enrichment and that of their families; the authorities
will deal with them from the point of view of the common weal.
T h e crux of the issue lies precisely in the operation of selfishness.
Under the system of inequality this selfishness impels a man to save
and always to invest his savings in such a way as to fill best the most
urgent needs of the consumers. Cnder the system of equality this
motive fades. T h e curtaiIment of consumption in the immediate future
is a perceptible privation, a blow to the individuals' selfish aims. T h e
increment in the supply available in more distant periods of the future
which is expected from this immediate privation is less recognizable
for the average intellect. Moreover, its beneficial effects are, under a
system of public accumulation, so thinly spread out that they hardly
appear t o a man as an appropriate compensation for what he foregoes
today. T h e welfare school blithely assumes that the expectation that
the fruits of today's saving will be reaped equally by the whole of the
future generation will turn everybody's selfishness'toward more saving. Thus they fall prey to a corollary of Plato's illusion that preventing people from knowing which children's parents they are will inspire them with parental feelings toward all younger people. It would
have been wise if the welfare school had been mindful of Aristotle's
observation that the result will rather be that all parents will be equally
indifferent to all ~ h i l d r e n . ~
T h e problem of maintaining and increasing capital is insoluble for
a socialist system which cannot resort to economic calculation. Such
a socialist commonweaIth lacks any method of ascertaining whether
its capital equipment is decreasing or increasing. But under intenentionism and under a socialist system which is still in a position to resort
t o economic calculation on the basis of prices established abroad,
things are not so bad. Here it is at least possible to comprehend what
is going on.
If such a country is under a democratic government, the problems
of capital preservation and accumulation of additional capital become
the main issue of political antagonisms. There will be demagogues to
contend that more could be dedicated to current consumption than
those who happen to be in power or the other parties are disposed to
allow. They will always be ready to declare that "in the present
emergency" there cannot h e any question of piling up capital for
later days and that, on rhe contrary, consumption of a part of the
9. Cf. Aristotle, Politics, Bk. 11, chap. iii in T h e B ~ s i cWorks of Aristotle, ed.

R,McKeon (New York, I 945), pp. I I 48 f.

846

Human Action

capital already available is fully justified. The various parties will
outbid one another in promising the voters more government spending and at the same time a reduction of all taxes which do not exclusively burden the rich. In the days of laissez faire people looked
upon government as an institution whose operation required an
expenditure of money which must be defrayed by taxes paid by the
citizens. In the individual citizens' budgets the state was an item of
expenditure. Today the majority of the citizens look upon government as an agency dispensing benefits. The wagc earners and the
farmers expect to receive from the treasury more than they contribute to its revenues. T h e state is in their eyes a spender, not a
taker. These popular tenets were rationalized and elcvated to the
rank of a quasi-economic doctrine by Lord Keynes and his disciples.
Spending and unbalanced budgets are merely synonyms for capital
consumption. If current expenditure, however beneficial it may be
considered, is financed by taxing away those parts of higher incomes
which would have been employed for investment. by inheritance
taxes, or by borrowing, the governmcnt becomes a factor malting
for capital consumption. T h e fact that in present-day America there
is probably lo still a surplus of annual capita1 accumulation over
annual capital consumption does not invalidate the statement that
the total complex of the financial policies of the Federal Government,
the States, and the municipalities tends toward capital consumption.
Many who are aware of the undesirable consequences of capital
consumption are prone to believe that popular government is incompatible with sound financial policies. They fail to realize that not
democracy as such is to be indicted, but the doctrines which aim
at substituting the Santa Claus conception of government for the
night watchman conception derided by Lassalle. What determines
the course of a nation's economic policies is always the economic
ideas held by public opinion. 9 0 government, whether democratic
or dictatorial, can free itself from the sway of the generally accepted
ideology.
Those advocating a restriction of the parliament's prerogatives in
budgeting and taxation issues or even a complete substitution of
authoritarian government for representative government are blinded
by the chimerical image of a perfect chief of state. This man, no less
benevolent than wise, would be sincerely dedicated to the promotion
of his subjects' lasting weIfare. The real Fiihrer, however, turns out
to be a mortaI man who first of a11 aims at the perpetuation of his
10. T h e attempts to answer this question by statistics are futile in this age of
inflation and credit expansion.

Welfare Principle Versus Market Principle

847

own supremacy and that of his kin, his friends, and his party. As
far as hc may resort to unpopular measures, he does so for the sake
of these objectives.' H e does not invest and accumulate capital. H e
constructs fortresses and equips armies.
The much talked about plans of the Soviet and Nazi dictators involved restriction of current consumption for the sake of "investment." T h e Nazis never tried to suppress the truth that all these
investments were designed as a preparation for the wars of aggression that they planned. The Soviets were less outspoken at the beginning. But today they proudly declare that all their planning was
directed by considerations of war preparedness. History does not
provide any example of capital accumulation brought about by a
government. As far as governments invested in the construction of
roads, railroads, and other uscful public works, the capital needed
was provided b y the savings of individual citizens and borrowed b\;
the government. But the greater part of the public debts was spe&
for current expenditure. W h a t individuals had saved was dissipated
by the government.
Even those who look upon the inequality of wealth and incomes
as a deplorable thing, cannot deny that it makes for progressing
capital accumulation. And it is additional capital accumulation alone
that brings about technological improvement, rising wage rates, and
a higher standard of living.

4. Insecurity
T h e vague notion of security which the weIfare doctrinaires have
in mind when complaining about insecurity refers t o something like
a warrant b\; means of which society guarantees to everybody, irrespective of his achievements, a standard of living which he considers
satisfactory.
Security in this sense, contend the eulogists of times gone by, was
provided uiidcr +LI.,.l b c >--A-d..!. 1 4 1
---.-1 1 1 ; of the Middle Ages. There is,
however, no need to enter into an examination of thew claims. Real
conditions even in the much-glorified thirteenth century were different from the idea1 picture painted by scholastic philosophy; these
schemes were meant as a description of conditions not as they were
but as they ought to bc. But even these utopias of the philosophers
and theologians allow for the existence of a numerous class of destitute beggars, entirely dependent on alms given by the wealthy. This
is not precisely the idea of security which the modern usage of the
term suggests.

848

Human Actzon

The concept of security is the wage earners' and small farmers'
pendant to the concept of stability heId by the capita1ists.l1 In the
same way in which capitalists want to enjoy permanently an income which is not subject to the vicissitudes of changing human
conditions, wage earners and small farmers want to make their revenues independent of the market. Both groups are eager to withdraw
from the flux of historical events. No further occurrcnck should impair their own position; on the other hand, of course, they do not
expressly object to an improvement of their material well-being. That
structure of the market to which they have in the past adjusted their
activities should never be altered in such a way as to force them to
a new adjustment. T h e farmer in a European mountain valley waxes
indignant upon encountering the competition of Canadian farmers
producing at iower costs. The house painter boils over with rage
when the introduction of a new appliance affects conditions in his
sector of the labor market. I t is obvious that the wishes of these
people could be fulfilled only in a perfectly stagnant world.
A characteristic feature of the unhampered market society is that
it is no respecter of vested interests. Past achievements do not count
if they are obstacles to further improvement. T h e advocates of security are therefore quite correct in blaming capitalism for insecurity. But they distort the facts in implying that the selfish interests
of capitalists and entrepreneurs are responsible. What harms the
vested interests is the urge of the consumers for the best possible
satisfaction of their needs. Not the greed of the wealthy few, but
the propensity of everyone to take advantage of any opportunity
offered for an improvement of his own well-being makes for producer
insecurity. What makes the house painter indignant is the fact that
his fellow citizens prefer cheaper houses to more expensive ones.
And the house painter himself, in preferring cheaper commodities
to dearer ones, contributes his share to the emergence of insecurity
in other sectors of the labor market.
It is certaidjr true that the necessity t o adjus: oneself again a i d
again to changing conditions is onerous. But change is the essence
of life. In an unhampered market economy the absence of security,
i.e., the absence of protection for vested interests, is the principle that
makes for a steady improvement in material well-being. There is no
need to argue with the bucolic dreams of Virgil and of eighteenthcentury poets and painters. There is no need to examine the kind of
security which the real shepherds enjoyed. N o one redly wishes
to change places with them.
I 1. Cf. above, pp. ~ 0 0 4 ~ 9 .

Welfare Principle Versus Market Principle

849

The longing for security became especially intense in the great
depression that started in 1929. I t met with an enthusiastic response
from the millions of unemployed. That is capitalism for you, shouted
the leaders of the pressure groups of the farmers and the wage earners.
Yet the evils were not created by capitalism, but, on the contrary,
by the endeavors to "reform" and to "improve" the operation of
the market economy by interventionism. The crash was the necessary outcome of the attempts to lower the rate of interest by credit
expansion. Institutional unemployment was the inevitable result of
the policy of minimum wage rates.

5. Social Justice
In one respect at least present-day welfare propagandists are superior to most of the older schools of socialists and reformers. They
no longer stress a concept of social justice with whose arbitrary precepts men should comply however disastrous the consequences may
be. They endorse the utilitarian point of view. They do not oppose
the principle that the only standard for appreciating social systems
is judging them with regard to their ability to realize the ends sought
by acting men.
However, as soon as they embark upon an examination of the operation of the market economy, they forget their sound intentions.
They hold up a set of metaphysical principles and condemn the market economy beforehand because it does not conform to them. They
smuggle in through a back door the idea of an absolute standard of
morality which they had barred from the main entrance. In searching
for remedies against poverty, inequality, and insecurity, they come
step by step to endorse all the fallacies of the older schools of socialism and interventionism. They become more and more entangled
in contradictions and absurdities. Finally they cannot help catching
at the straw at which all earlier "unorthod~x'~
reformers tried to grasp
-the superior wisdom of perfect rulers. Their last word is always
state, government, society, or other cleverly designed synonyms for
the superhuman dictator.
T h e welfare school, foremost among them the German Kathedersozinlisten and their adepts, the American I~lstitutionalists,have published many thousands of volumes stuffed with punctiliously documented information about unsatisfactory conditions. In their opinion
the colIected materials clearly ilIustratc the shortcomings of capitalism. In truth they merely illustrate the fact that human u.,ants are
practically unlimited and that there is an immense field open for

850
Human Action
further improvements. T h e y certainly do not prove any of the statements of the welfare doctrine.
There is no need to tell us that an ampler supply of various commodities would be welcome to all people. T h e question is whether
there is any means of achieving a greater supply other than by increasing the productivity of labor by the investment of additional
capital. A11 the babble of the welfarc propagandists aims only at one
end, namely, obscuring this point, the point that alone matters. While
the accumulation of additional capital is the indispensable means for
any further economic progress, these people speak of "oversaving"
and "overinvestment," of the necessity of spcnding more and of
restricting output. Thus they are the h&bingers of economic retrogression, preaching a philosophy of decay and social disintegration.
A society arranged according to their precepts may appear to some
people as fair from the point of view of an arbitrary standard of
social justice. But it wiIl certainly be a society of progressing poverty
for all its members.
For a century at Ieast public opinion in Western countries has
been deluded by the idea that there is such a thing as "the social
question" or "the labor problem." T h e meaning implied was that the
very existence of capitaIism hurts the vital interests of the masses,
especially those of the wage earners and the small farmers. T h e
preservation of this manifestly unfair system cannot be tolerated;
radical reforms are indispensable.
T h e truth is that capitalism has not only multiplied population
figures but at the same time improved the people's standard of Iiving in an unprecedented way. Neither economic thinking nor historical experience suggest that any other social system corlld be
more beneficial to the masses than capitalism. T h c results speak for
themselves. T h e market economy needs no apologists and propagandists. I t can apply to itself the words of Sir Christopher Wren's
epitaph in St. Paul's: Si nzonzmzentmz requiris, circu7nspice.l"
I 2.

If you seek his monument, look around.

XXXVI. T H E CRISIS OF INTERVENTIONISM

r. The Harvest of Interventionism
HE interventionist: policies as practiced for many decades by all
governments of the capitalistic West have brought about all
those effects which the economists predicted. There are wars and
civil wars, ruthless oppression of the masses by clusters of selfappointed dictators, economic depressions, mass unemployment, capital consumption, famines.
However, it is not these catastrophic events which have led to
the crisis of interventionism. The interventionist doctrinaires and
their followers explain all these undesired consequences as the unavoidable features of capitalism. As they see it, it is precisely these
disasters that clearly denlonstrate thc necessity of intensifying interventionism. The failures of the interventionist policies do not in the
least impair the popularity of the implied doctrine. They arc so interpreted as to strengthen, not to lessen, the prestige of these teachings. As a vicious economic thcory cannot be simply refuted by
historical experience, the interventionist propagandists have been
able to go on in spite of all the havoc they have spread.
Yet the age of interventionism is reaching its end. Interventionism
has exhausted all its potentialities and must disappear.

T

2.

T h e Exhaustion of the Reserve Fund

The idea underlying all interventionist policies is that the higher
nf the mere &luefit p r t sf the pepu!adm is a
fund which can be freely used for the improvement of the conditions
of the less prosperous. The essence of the interventionist policy is
to take from one group to give to another. It is confiscation and distribution. Every measure is ultimately justified by declaring that it
is fair to curb the rich for the benefit of the poor.
In the field of public finance progressive taxation of incomes and
estates is the most characteristic manifestation of this doctrine. Tax
the rich and spend the revenue for the improvement of the condition of the poor, is the principle of contemporary budgets. In the
inromp
--- - -- - - and wea!th

852

Human A c t i o ~

field of industrial relations shortening the hours of work, raising
wages, and a thousand other measures are recommended under the
assumption that they favor the employee and burden the employer.
Every issue of government and community affairs is dealt with exclusively from the point of view of this principle.
An illustrative example is provided by the methods applied in the
operation of nationalized and municipalized enterprises. These enterprises very often result in financial failure; their accounts regularly
show losses burdening the state or the city treasury. It is of no use
to investigate whether the deficits are due to the notorious inefficiency
of the public conduct of business enterprises or, at least partly, to
the inadequacy of the prices at which the commodities or services
are sold to the customers. What matters more is the fact that the taxpayers must cover these deficits. The interventionists fully approve
of this arrangement. They passionately reject the two other possible
solutions: selling the enterprises to private entrepreneurs or raising
the prices charged to the customers to such a height that no further
deficit remains. The first of these proposals is in their eyes manifestly reactionary because the inevitable trend of history is toward
more and more socialization. The second is deemed "antisocial" because it places a heavier load upon the consuming masses. I t is fairer
to make the taxpayers, i.e., the wealthy citizens, bear the burden.
Their ability to pay is greater than that of the average people riding
the nationalized railroads and the municipalized subways, trolleys,
and busses. T o ask that such public utilities should be self-supporting,
is, say the interventionists, a relic of the old-fashioned ideas of orthodox finance. One might as well aim at making the roads and the public
schools self-supporting.
I t is not necessary to argue with the advocates of this deficit policy.
It is obvious that recourse to this ability-to-pay principle depends
on the existence of such incomes and fortunes as can still be taxed
away. It can no longer be resorted to once these extra funds have
been exhausted by taxes and other interventionist measures.
This is precisely the present state of affairs in most of the European countries. The United States has not yet gone so far; but if
the actual trend of its economic policies is not radically altered very
soon, it will be in the same condition in a few years.
For the sake of argument we may disregard aI1 the other consequences which the fulI triumph of the ability-to-pay principle must
bring about and concentrate upon its financial aspects.
The interventionist in advocating additional public expenditure is
not aware of the fact that the funds available are limited. H e does not

The Crisis of Interventionism

853

realize that increasing expenditure in one department enjoins restricting it in other departments. I n his opinion there is plenty of money
available. The income and wealth of the rich can be freely tapped.
In recommending a greater allowance for the schools he simply
stresses the point that it would be a good thing to spend more for
education. He does not venture to prove that to raise the budgetary
allowance for schools is more expedient than to raise that of another department, e.g., that of health. It never occurs to him that
grave arguments could be advanced in favor of restricting public
spending and lowering the burden of taxation. T h e champions of
cuts in the budget are in his eyes merely the defenders of the manifestly unfair class interests of the rich.
With the present height of income and inheritance tax rates, this
reserve fund out of which the interventionists seek to cover all public expenditure is rapidly shrinking. It has practically disappeared
altogether in most European countries. In the United States the recent advances in tax rates produced only negligible revenue results
beyond what would be produced by a progression which stopped
at much lower rates. High surtax rates for the rich arc very popdar
with interventionist dilettantes and demagogues, but they secure only
modest additions to the revenue.l From day to day it becomes more
obvious that large-scale additions to the amount of public expenditure cannot be financed by "soaking the rich," but that the burden
must be carried by the masses. The traditional tax policy of the age
of interventionism, its glorified devices of progressive taxation and
lavish spending, have been carried to a point at which their absurdity can no longer be concealed. The notorious principle that,
whereas private expenditures depend on the size of income available,
public revenues must be regulated according to expenditures, refutes
itself. Henceforth, governments will have to realize that one dolIar
cannot be spent twice, and that the various items of government expenditure are in conflict with one another. Every penny of additional government spending will have to be collected from precisely
those people who hitherto have been intent upon shifting the main
burden to other groups. Those anxious to get subsidies will have to
I. In the United States the surtax rate under the 1942 Act was 52 per cent on the
taxable income bracket $zz,ooo-26,000. If the surtax had stopped at this level, the
loss of revenue on 1942 income would have been about $249 million or 2.8 per cent
of the total individual income tax for that year. In the same year the total net incomes in the income classes of $~o,oooand above was $8,91z million. Complete
confiscation of these incomes would not have produced as much revenuc as was
obtained in this year from all taxable incomes, namely, $9,046 million. Cf. A Tax
Program for a Solvent America, Committee on Postwar T a x Policy (New York,
194,-), pp. "6-717, 120.

S j4

Human Action

foot the bill themselves for the subsidies. T h e deficits of publicly
owned and operated enterprises will be charged to the bulk of the
population.
T h e situation in the employer-employee nexus will be analogous.
'The popular doctrine contends that wage earners are reaping "social
gains" at the expense of the unearned income of the exploiting classes.
The strikers, it is said, do not strike against the consumers but against
"matiagement." There is no reason to raise the prices of products when
labor costs are increased; the difference must be borne by employers.
But when more and more of the share of the entreprene;rs and capitalists is absorbed by taxes, higher wage rates, and other "social gains"
of employees, and by price ceilings, nothing remains for such a buffer
function. Then it becomes evident that every wage raise, with its
whole momentum, must atiect the prices of the products and that
the social gains of each group fully correspond to the social Iosses
of the other groups. Every strike becomes, even in the short run and
not only in the long run, a strike against the rest of the people.
An essential point in the social philosophy of interventionism is the
existence of an inexhaustible fund which can be squeezed forever.
The whole doctrine of interventionisin collapses when this fountain
is drained off. The Santa Claus principle liquidates itself.

3. T h e End of Interventionism
The interventionist interlude must come to an end because interventionism cannot lead to a permanent systenl of social organization.
The reasons are threefold.
First: Restrictive measures always restrict output and the amount
of goods available for consumption. Whatever arguments may be
advanced in favor of definite restrictions and prohibitions, such measures in themselves can never constitute a system of social production.
Second: All varieties of interference with the market phenomena
not only fail to achieve the ends aimed at by their authors and supporters, but bring about a state of affairs which-from the point of
view of their authors' and advocates' valuations-is Iess desirable
than the previous state of affairs which they were designed to alter.
If one wants to correct their manifest unsuitablencss and preposterousness by supplementing the first acts of intervention with more
and more of such acts, one must go farther and farther until the
market economy has been entirely destroyed and socialism has been
substituted for it.
Third: Interventionism aims at confiscating the "surplus" of one

The Cl'isis of l~zte~ventionisnz

855

part of the population and a t giving it to the other part. Once this
surplus is exhausted by total confiscation, a further continuation of
this policy is impossible.
Marching ever further on the way of interventionism, first Germany, then Great Britain and many other European countries have
adopted central planning, the Hindenburg pattern of socialism. It is
noteworthy that in Germany the deciding measures wcre n o t resorted to by the Nazis, but some timc before Hitler seized power by
Briining, the Catholic Chancellor of the Weimar Republic, and in
Great Britain not b y the Labor Party but by the T o r y Prime Minister
Mr. Churchill. T h e fact has been purposely obscured by the great
sensation made in Great Britain about the nationalization of the Bank
of England, the coal mines, and other enterprises. However, these
seizures were of subordinate importance only. Great Britain is t o
be called a socialist country not because certain enterprises have been
formally cxpropriatcd and nationalized, but because all the economic
activities of all citizens are subject to full control b y the government
and its agencies. T h e authorities direct the allocation of capita1 and
of rnanpowcr to the various branches of 'business; they cletcrmine
what should be ~ r o d u c e dand in what quality and quantity, and
they assign to each consumer a definite ration. Supremacy in all economic matters is exclusivcly vested in the government. T h e people
are reduced to the status of wards. T o the businessmen, the former
entrepreneurs, merely quasi-managerial functions are left. All that
they are free to d o is to carry into effect the entrepreneurial decisions
of the authorities within a ieatly delimited narrow field.
It has been shown that the managerial system, i.e., the assignment of ancillary tasks in the conduct of business to responsible helpers t o whom a ccrtajn amount of discretion can be granted, is possible only within the frame of the profit system.' W h a t characterizes
the manager as such and imparts to him a condition different from
that of the mere technician is that, within the sphere of his assignment, he himself determines the methods by which his actions should
conform t o the profit principle. In a socialist system in which there
is neither economic calculation nor capital accounting nor profit
computation, there is no room left for managerial activities either.
Rut as long as a socialist commonwealth is stilI in a position t o caIculate on the ground of prices determined on foreign markets, it
can also utiIizc a quasi-managerial hierarchy to some extent.
It is a poor makeshift to call any age an age of transition. In the
living world there is alwavs change. Every age is an age of transition,
2. Cf.above, pp. ;or-pj.

Hunzan Action
W e may distinguish between social systems that can last and such
as arc inevitably transitory because they are self-destructive. I t has
already been pointed our in what sense interventionism liquidates itself and must lead to socialism of the German pattern. Most of the
European countries have already reached this phase, and nobody
knows whether or not the United States will follow suit. But as long
as the United States clings to the marltet economy and does not adopt
the system of full government control of business, the socialist economies of Western Europe will still be in a position to calculate. Their
conduct of business still lacks the characteristic feature of socialist
conduct; it is still based on economic calculation. It is therefore in
every respect very different from what it would become if all the
world were to turn toward socialism.
It is often said that one half of the world cannot remain committed to the market economy when the other half is socialist, and
vice versa. However, there is no reason to assume that such a partition
of the earth and the coexistence of the two systems is impossible.
If this is really the case, then the present economic system of the
countries that have discarded capitalism may go on for an indefinite
period of time. Its operation may result in social disintegration, chaos,
and misery for the peoples. But neither a low standard of living nor
progressive impoverishment automatically liquidates an economic systern. It gives way to a more efficient system only if people themselves
are intelligent enough to comprehend the advantages such a change
might bring them. Or it may be destroyed by foreign invaders provided with bctter military equipment by the greater efficiency of their
own economic system.
Optimists hope that at least those nations which have in the past
devcloped the capitalist marltet economy and its civilization will
cling to this system in the future too. There are certainly as many
signs to confirm as to disprove such an expectation. It is vain to
speculate about the outcome of the great ideological conflict between
the principles of private ownership and public ownership, of individualisnl and totalitarianism, of freedom and authoritarian regimentation. All that we can know beforehand about the result of this struggle can be condensed in the following three statements:
I . We have no knowledge whatever about the existence and operation of agencies which would bestow final victory in this clash
on those ideologies whose application will secure the preservation and
further intensification of societal bonds and the improvement of mankind's material well-being. Nothing suggests the belief that progress

The Crisis of Irzterventionism

857

toward more satisfactory conditions is inevitable or a relapse into
very unsatisfactory conditions impossible.
2 . Men must choose between the market economy and sociaIism.
They cannot evade deciding between these alternatives by adopting
a "middle-of-the-road" position, whatever name they may give to it.
3. In abolishing econon~iccalculation the generai adoption of socialism would result in complete chaos and the disintegration of
social cooperation under the division of Iabor.

Part Seven

XXSVII. THE NONDESCRIPT CHARACTER OF
ECONOMICS
I.

T h e Sitlgularity of Econonlics

assigns economics its peculiar and uniquc position in the
orbit borh of pure knowledge and of the practical utilization
W
of knowledge is the fact that its particular theorems are not open
~IAT

to any verification or falsification on the ground of experience. Of
course, a measure suggested by sound economic reasoning rcsults
in producing the effects ainlcd at, and a measure suggested by faulty
economic reasoning fads to produce the ends sought. But such cxperience is always still historical experience, ie., the expericnce of complex phenomena. I t can never, as has been pointed out, prove or disprove any particular theorem.' T h e appIication of spurious ccononlic
theorems results in undesircd consequences. But these effects never
have that undisputable pomcr of conviction which the experimental
facts in the ficld of the natural sciences provide. T h e ultimate yardstick of an economic theorem's correctncss or jncorrectncss is soIcly
reason unaided by expericnce.
T h e ornillous import of this state of affairs is that it prevents the
naive mind from recognizing the reality of the things economics
deals with. "Real" is, in the cycs of man, all that hc cannot alter and
to whosc existence he must adjust his actions if he wants to attain
his cnds. T h e cognizance of reality is a sad experience. I t teaches the
limits on the satisfaction of one's wishes. Only reluctantly does man
resign himself to the insight that there arc things, viz., the whole
complex of all causal relations between events, which wishful thinking cannot alter. Yet sense expericnce speaks an easily perceptible
language. There is no use arguing about experiments. T h e reality of
experimentally established facts cannot be contested.
But in the ficld of praxeological knowledge neither success nor failure speaks a distinct language audible t o everybody. T h e experience
derived exclusively from complex phenomena does not bar escape
into interpretations based on wishful thinking. T h e na'ive man's
propensity to ascribe omnipotence to his thoughts, however confused
I . Cf. above, pp. 3 1-32.

T h e Nondescript Character of Economics

859
and contradictory, is never manifestly and unambiguously falsified
by experience. The economist can never refute the economic cranks
and quacks in the way in which the doctor refutes the medicine man
and the charlatan. History speaks only to those people who know
how to interpret it on the ground of correct theories.
2.

Economics and Public Opinion

The significance of this fundamental epistemological difference
becomes clear if we realize that the practical utilization of the teachings of economics presupposes their endorsement by public opinion.
In the market economy the realization of technological innovations
does not require anything more than the cognizance of their reasonableness by one or a few enlightened spirits. N o dullness and clumsiness on the part of the masses can stop the pioneers of improvement.
There is no need for them to win the approval of incrt people beforehand. They are free to embark upon their projects even if everyone
else laughs at them. Later, when the new, better, and cheaper products
appear on the market, these scoffers will scramble for them. However dull a man may be, he knows how to tell the difference between
a cheaper shoe and a more expensive one, and to appreciate the usefulness of new products.
But it is different in the field of social organization and economic
policies. Here the best theories are useless if not supported by public
opinion. They cannot work if not accepted by a majority of the
people. Whatever the system of government may be, there cannot
be any question of ruling a nation lastingly on the ground of doctrines at variance with public opinion. In the end the philosophy of
the majority prevails. In the long run there cannot be any such
thing as an unpopular system of government. The difference between
democracy and despotism does not affect the final outcome. It refers
only to the method by which the adjustment of the system of government to the ideology held by public opinion is brought about.
Unpopular autocrats can only be dethroned by revolutionary upheavals, while unpopular democratic rulers are peacefully ousted in
the next election.
The supremacy of public opinion determines not only the singular
role that economics occupies in the complex of thought and knowledge. I t determines the whole process of human history.
T h e customary discussions concerning the role the individual plays
in history miss the point. Everything that is thought, done and accomplished is a performance of individuals. New ideas and innova-

860

Human Actiort

tions are always an achievement of uncommon men. But these great
men cannot succeed in adjusting social conditions to their plans
if they do not convince public opinion.
T h e flowering of human society depends on two factors: the intellectual power of outstanding men to conceive sound social and
economic theories, and the ability of these or other men to make
these ideologies palatable to the majority.

3. The Illusion of the Old Liberals
T h e masses, the hosts of common men, do not conceive any ideas,
sound or unsound. They only choose between the ideologies developed by the intellectual leaders of mankind. But their choice is
final and determines the course of events. If they prefer bad doctrines, nothing can prevent disaster.
The social philosophy of the Enlightenment failed to see the
dangers that the prevalence of unsound ideas could engender. The
objections customarily raised against the rationalism of the classical
economists and the utilitarian thinkers are vain. But there was one
deficiency in their doctrines. They blithely assumed that what is reasonable will carry on merely on account of its reasonableness. They
never gave a thought to the possibility that public opinion could
favor spurious ideologies w-hose realization would harm welfare and
well-being and disintegrate social cooperation.
It is fashionable today to disparage those thinkers who criticized
the liberal philosophers' faith in the common man. Yet, Burke and
Haller, Bonald and de Allaistre paid attention to an essential problem
which the liberals had neglected. They were more realistic in the
appraisal of the masses than their adversaries.
Of course, the conservative thinkers labored under the illusion that
the traditional system of paternal government and the rigidity of economic institutions could be preserved. They were full of praise for
the ancien regime which had made people prosperous and had even
humanized war. But they did not see that it was precisely these
achievements that had increased population figures and thus created
an excess population for which there was no room left in the old
system of economic restrictionism. They shut their eyes to the growth
of a class of people which stood outside the pale of the social order
they wanted to perpetuate. They failed to suggest any solution to
the most burning problem with which mankind had to cope on the
eve of the "Industrial Revolution."
Capitalism gave the world what it needed, a higher standard of liv-

The Nondescript Character of Economics

86 I

ing for a steadily increasing number of people. But the liberals, the
pioneers and supporters of capitalism, overlooked one essential point.
A social system, however beneficial, cannot work if it is not supported by public opinion. They did not anticipate the success of the
anticapitaljstjc propaganda, After having nullified the fable of the
divine rnission of anointed kings, the liberals fell prey to no less illusory doctrines, to the irresistible power of reason, to the infallibility
of the volonte' gkstkale and to the divine inspiration of majorities. In
the long run, they thought, nothing can stop the progressive improvement of social conditions. In unmasking age-old superstitions the
philosophy of the EnIightenment has once and for all established the
supremacy of reason. The accompIishments of the policies of freedom will provide such an overwhelming demonstration of the blessings of the new ideology that no intelligent man will verlture to question it. And, implied the philosophers, the immense majority of people
are intelligent and able to think correctly.
I t never occurred t6 the old liberals that the majority could interpret historical experience on the ground of other philosophies.
They did not anticipate the popularity which ideas that they would
have called reactionary, superstitious, and unreasonable acquired in
the nineteenth and twenticth centuries. They were so fully imbued
with the assumption that all men are endoked with the faculty of
correct reasoning that they entirely misconstrued the meaning of
the portcnts. As they saw it, all these unpleasant events were temporary relapses, accidental episodes to which no importance could
be attached by the philosopher looking upon tnanltind's history sub
specie aeternitatis. Whatever the reactionaries might say, there was
one fact which thcy would not be able to deny; namely, that capitalism provided for a rapidly increasing population a steadily improving
standard of living.
It is precisely this fact that the immense majority did contest. The
essential point in the teachings of all socialist authors, and especially
in the teachings of Marx, is the doctrine that capitalism results in a
progressive pauperization of the working masses. With regard to the
capitalistic countries the fallacy of this theorem can hardly be ignored. With rcgard to the backward countries, which were only
superficially affected by capitalism, the unprecedented increase in
population figures does not suggest the interpretation that: the masses
sink deepcr and deeper. These countries are poor when compared
with the more advanced countries. Their poverty js the outcome of
the rapid growth of population. These peoples have preferred to rear
more progeny instead of raising the standard of living to a higher

862

Hunzam Action

level. That is their own affair. But the fact remains that they had the
wealth to prolong the average length of life. It would have been impossible for them to bring up more children if the means of sustenance
had not been increased.
Nonetheless not only the Marxians but many allegedly "bourgeois"
authors assert that hlarx's anticipation of capitalist evolution has been
by and large verified by the history of the last eighty years.

XXXVIII. THE PIACE OF ECONOMICS I N LEARNING
I.

T h e Study of Economics

HE naturaI sciences are ultimately

based on the facts as established by laboratory experiment. Physical and biological theories are confronted with these facts, and are rejected when in conflict with them. The perfection of these theories no less than the
improvement of technological and therapeutical procedures requires
more and better laboratory research. These experimental ventures
absorb time, painstaking effort of specialists, and costly expenditure
of material. Research can no longer be conducted by isolated and
penniless scientists, however ingenious. The seat of experimentation
today is in the huge laboratories supported by governments, universities, endowments, and big business. Work in these institutions has
developed into professional routine. The majority of those employed
in it are technicians recording those facts which the pioneers, of whom
some are themselves experimenters, will one day use as building stones
for their theories. As far as the progress of scientific theories is concerned, the achievements of the rank-and-file researcher are only
ancillary. But very often his discoveries have immediate practical
results in improving the methods of therapeutics and of business.
Ignoring the radical epistemological difference between the natural
sciences and the sciences of human action, people believe that what
is needed to furthcr economic knowledge is t o organize economic
research according to the well-tried methods of the institutes for
medical, physical, and chemical research. Considerable sums of money
have been spent for what is labeled economic research. In fact the
subject matter of the work of all these institutes is recent economic
history.
It is certainly a laudable thing to encourage the study of economic
history. However instructive the result of such studies may be, one
must not confuse them with the study of econon~ics.They do not
produce facts in the sense in which this term is applied with regard
to the events tested in laboratory experiments. They do not deliver
bricks for the construction of a posteriori hypotheses and theorems.
O n the contrary, they are without meaning if not interpreted in the

T

864
Hzman Action
light of theories developed without reference to them. There is no
need to add anything to what has been said in this respect in the
preceding chapters. N o controversy concerning the causes of a historical event can be solved on the ground of an examination of the
facts which is not guided by definite praxeological theories1
The foundation of institutes for cancer research can possibly contribute to the discovery of methods for fighting and preventing this
pernicious disease. But a business cycle research institute is of no
help in endeavors to avoid the recurrence of depressions. The most
exact and reliable assemblage of all the data concerning economic
depressions of the past is of little use for our knowledge in this field.
Scholars do not disagree with regard to these data; they disagree
with regard to the theorems to be resorted to in their interpretation.
Still more important is the fact that it is impossible to collect the
data concerning a concrete event without reference to the theories
held by the historian at the very outset of his work. The historian
does not report all facts, but only those which he considers as relevant on the ground of his theories; he omits data considered irrelevant
for the interpretation of the events. If he is misled by faulty theories,
his report becomes clumsy and may be almost worthless.
Even the most faithful examination of a chapter of cconomic history, though it be the history of the most recent period of the past,
is no substitute for economic thinking. Economics, like logic and
mathematics, is a display of abstract reasoning. Economics can never
be experimental and empirical. The economist does not need an expensive apparatus for the conduct of his studies. What he needs is
the power to think clearly and to discern in the wilderness of events
what is essential from what is merely accidental.
There is no conflict between cconomic history and economics.
Every branch of knowledge has its own merits and its own rights.
Economists have never tried to belittle or deny the significance of
economic history. Neither do real historians object to the study of
,,:,,,,,,
LLUIIVIIIILJ.

TL

..,,,

I I L L a l l ~~aU I I I J ~wI ~
d3

:-..n~-:-..,ir.-

- - n ~l l l
:-AI.-:-L-L U UClllfS Uy

II L L G I I L I U L ~ ~ I ~ ~
LdllcU

the socialists and interventionists who could not refute the objections
raised against their doctrines by the economists. The Historical School
and the Institutionalists tried to displace econonlics and to substitute
"empirical" studies for it precisely because they wanted to silence
the economists. Economic history, as they planned it, was a means
I . Cf., about the essential epistemological problems involved, pp. 31-40, about
the problem of "quantitative" economics, pp. 55-57 and 347-349, and about the
antagonistic interpretation of labor conditions under capitalism, pp. 613-61 8.

T h e Place of Economics in Learning

865
of destroying the prestige of economics and of propagandizing for
interventionism.
2.

Economics as a Profession

The early economists devoted themselves to the study of the problems of economics. In lecturing and writing books they were eager
to communicate to their fellow citizens the results of their thinking.
They tried to influence public opinion in order to make sound policies prevail in the conduct of civic affairs. They never conceived of
economics as a profession.
The development of a profession of economists is an offshoot of
interventionism. The professional economist is the specialist who is
instrumental in designing various measures of government interference with business. He is an expert in the field of economic legislation,
which today invariably aims at hindering the operation of the unhampered market economy.
There are thousands and thousands of such professional experts
busy in the bureaus of the governments and of the various political
parties and pressure groups and in the editorial offices of party newspapers and pressure group periodicals. Others are employed as advisers by business or run independent agencies. Some of them have
nation-wide or even world-wide reputations; many are among the
most influential men of their country. It often happens that such experts are called to direct the affairs of big banks and corporations, are
elected into the legislature, and are appointed as cabinet ministers.
They rival the legal profession in the supreme conduct of political
affairs. The eminent role they play is one of the most characteristic
features of our age of interventionism.
There can be no doubt that a class of men who are so preponderant
includes extremely talented individuals, even the most eminent men
of our age. But the philosophy that guides their activities narrows
their horizon. By virtue of their connection with definite parties
and n
r e s s ~ r egroupsi eager t o a c q --~ i -r--~r n
~~rigl
privileges, the..Y became
I
one-sided. They shut their eyes to the remoter consequences of the
policies they are advocating. With them nothing counts but the shortrun concerns of the group they are serving. The ultimate aim of their
efforts is to make their clients prosper at the expense of other people.
They are intent upon convincing themselves that the fate of mankind coincides with the short-run interests of their group. They try
to sell this idea to the public. In fighting for a higher price of silver,
of wheat, or of sugar, for higher wages for the members of their
-

-

Human Action

866

union, or for a tariff on cheaper foreign products, they claim to
be fighting for the supreme good, for liberty and justice, for their
nation's flowering, and for civilization.
The public looks askance upon the lobbyists and blames them for
the dismal features of interventionist legislation. However, the seat
of the evil is much deeper. The philosophy of the various pressure
groups has penetrated the legislative bodies. There are in the presentday parliaments representatives of wheat growers, of cattle breeders,
of farmers' cooperatives, of silver, of the various labor unions, of industries which cannot stand foreign competition without tariffs, and
of many other pressure groups. There are few for whom the nation
counts more than their pressure group. The same holds true for the
departments of the administration. The cabinet minister of agriculture considers himself the champion of the interests of farming; his
main objective is to make food prices soar. The minister of labor
considers himself the advocate of labor unions; his foremost aim is
to make the unions as formidable as possible. Each department follows its own course and works against the endeavors of the other
departments.
Many people complain today about the lack of creative statesmanship. However, under the predominance of interventionist ideas, a
political career is open only to men who identify themselves with
the interests of a pressure group. The mentality of a union leader
or of a secretary of farmers' associations is not what is required for a
far-sighted statesman. Service to the short-run interests of a pressure
group is not conducive to the development of those qualities which
make a great statesman. Statesmanship is invariably long-run policy;
but pressure groups do not bother about the long run. The lamentable
failure of the German Weimar system and of the Third Republic in
France was primarily due to the fact that their politicians were merely
experts in pressure group interests.
l7 -

j. r orecasting as a Profession

When the businessmen finally learned that the boom created by
credit expansion cannot last and must necessarily Iead to a slump,
they realized that it was important for them to know in time the
date of the break. They turned to the economists for advice.
T h e economist knows that the boom must result in a depression.
But he does not and cannot know when the crisis will appear. This
depends on the special conditions of each case. Many political events
can influence the outcome. There are no rules according to which

The Place of Economics in Learning

g67

the duration of the boom or of the following depression can be
computed. And even if such rules were available, they would be of
no use to businessmen. What the individual businessman needs in order to avoid losses is knowledge about the date of the turning point
at a time when other businessmen still believe that the crash is farther
away than is really the case. Then his superior knowledge will give
him the opportunity to arrange his own operations in such a way as
ro come out unharmed. But if the end of the boom could be calculated according to a formula, all businessmen would learn the date
at the same time. Their endeavors to adjust their conduct of affairs
to this information would immediately result in the appearance of all
the phenomena of the depression. It would be too late for any of them
to avoid being victimized.
If it were possible to calculate the future structure of the market,
the future would not be uncertain. There would be neither entrepreneurial loss nor profit. What people expect from the economists is
beyond the power of any mortal man.
The very idea that the future is predictable, that some formulas
could be substituted for the specific understanding which is the essence of entrepreneurial activity, and that familiarity with these
formulas could make it possible for anybody to take over the conduct of business is, of course, an outgrowth of the whole complex
of fallacies and misconceptions which are at the bottom of presentday anticapitalistic policies. There is in the whole body of what is
called the Marxian philosophy not the slightest reference to the fact
that the main task of action is to provide for the events of an uncertain
future. The fact that the terms promoter and speculator are today
used only with an opprobrious connotation clearly shows that our
contemporaries do not even suspect in what the fundamental problem of action consists.
Entrepreneurial judgment is one of those things that cannot be
bought on the market. The entrepreneurial idea that carries on and
brings profit is precisely that ideawhich did not occur to the majority. I t is not correct foresight as such that yields profits, but foresight better than that of the rest. The prize goes only to those dissenters who do not let themselves be misled by the errors accepted
by the multitude. What makes profits emerge is the provision for
future needs for which others have neglected to make adequate provision.
Entrepreneurs and capitalists expose their own material well-being
if they are fully convinced of the soundness of their plans. They
would never venture to take their economic life into their hands be-

Human Action

868

cause an expert advised them to do so. Those ignorant people who
operate on the stock and commodity exchanges according to tips
are destined to lose their money, from whatever source they may
have got their inspiration and "inside" information.
In fact both the economists and the businessmen are fully aware
of the uncertainty of the future. The businessmen realize that the
economists do not dispense any reliable information about things to
come and that all that they provide is interpretation of statistical data
referring to the past. For the capitalists and entrepreneurs the economists' opinions about the future count only as questionable conjectures. They are skeptical and not easily fooled. But as they quite correctly believe that it is useful to know all the data which could possibly
have any relevance for their affairs, they subscribe to the newspapers
and periodicals publishing the forecasts. Anxious not to neglect any
source of information available, big business employs staffs of economists and statisticians.
Business forecasting fails in the vain attempts to make the uncertainty of the future disappear and to deprive entrepreneurship of its
inherent speculative character. But it renders very valuable services
in assembling and interpreting the available data about economic
trends and developments of the recent past.

4. Economics and the Universities
Tax-supported universities are under the sway of the party in
power. The authorities try to appoint only professors who are ready
to advance ideas of which they themselves approve. As all nonsocialist
governments are today firmly committed to interventionism, they
appoint only interventionists. In their opinion, the first duty of the
university is to sell the official social philosophy to the rising gen
erati~n.~
They have no use for economists.
However, interventionism prevails also at many of the independent

.

..

U 1 1 I V G l SlLlCb.

According to an age-old tradition the objective of the universities
is not only teaching, but also the promotion of knowledge and science. The duty of the university teacher is not merely to hand down
to the students the complex of knowledge developed by other men.
H e is supposed to contribute to the enlargement of this treasure by
his own work. It is assumed that he is a full-fledged member of the
2. G. Santayana, in speaking of a professor of philosophy of the-then Royal
Pmssian-University of Berlin, observed that it seemed to this man "that a professor's business was to trudge along the governmental towpath with a legal
cargo." (Persons and Places, [New York, 19451~11,7.)

The Place of Economics in Learning
world-embracing republic of scholarship, an innovator and a pioneer
on the road toward more and better knowledge. N o university would
admit that the members of its faculty are inferior to anybody in their
respective fields. Every university professor considers himself equal
to a11 other masters of his science. Like the greatest of them, he
too contributes his share to the advancement of learning.
This idea of the equality of all professors is, of course, fictitious.
There is an enormous difference between the creative work of the
genius and the monograph of a specialist. Yet in the field of empirical
research it is possible to cling to this fiction. The great innovator and
the simple routinist resort in their investigations to the same technical methods of research. They arrange laboratory experiments or
collect historical documents. The outward appearance of their work
is the same. Their publications refer to the same subjects and problems. They are commensurable.
It is quite otherwise in theoretical sciences like philosophy and economics. Here there is nothing that the routinist can achieve according
to a more or less stereotyped pattern. There are no tasks which require the conscientious and painstaking effort of. sedulous monographers. There is no empirical research; all must be achieved by the
power to reflect, to meditate, and to reason. There is no specialization, as all problems are linked with one another. In dealing with any
part of the body of knowledge one deals actually with the whole.
An eminent historian once described the psychological and educational significance of the doctoral thesis by declaring that it gives
the author the proud assurance that there is a little corner, although
small, in the field of learning in the knowledge of which he is second
to none. I t is obvious that this effect cannot be realized by a thesis
on a subject of economic analysis. There are no such isolated corners
in the complex of economic thought.
There never lived at the same time more than a score of men whose
work contributed anything essential to economics. T h e number of
creative men is as small in economics as it is in other fields of learning. Besides, many of the creative economists do not belong to the
teaching profession. But there is a demand for thousands of university and college teachers of economics. Scholastic tradition requires that each of them should attest his worth by the publication
of original contributions, not merely by compiling textbooks and
manuals. An academic teacher's reputation and salary depend more
on his literary work than on his didactic abilities. A professor cannot help publishing books. If he does not feel the vocation to write
on economics, he turns to economic history or descriptive economics.

870
Human Action
But then, in order not to lose face, he must insist on the claim that
the problems he treats are economics proper, not economic history.
He must even pretend that his writings cover the only legitimate field
of economic studies, that they alone are empirical, inductive, and
scientific, while the merely deductive outpourings of the "armchair"
theorists are idle speculations. If he were to neglect this, he would
admit that there are among the teachers of economics two classesthose who themselves have contributed to the advancement of economic thought and those who have not, although they may have done
a fine job in other disciplines such as recent economic history. Thus
the academic atmosphere becomes unpropitious for the teaching of
economics. Many professors-happily not all of them-are intent
upon disparaging "mere theory." They try to substitute an unsystematically assembled collection of historical and statistical information for economic analysis. They dissolve economics into a number
of integrated branches. They specialize in agriculture, in labor, in
Latin American conditions, and in many other similar subdivisions.
I t is certainly one of the tasks of university training to make students familiar with economic history in general and no less with
recent economic developments. But all such endeavors are doomed
to failure if not firmly grounded upon a thorough acquaintance with
economics. Economics does not allow of any breaking up into special
branches. It invariably deals with the interconnectedness of all the
phenomena of action. The catallactic problems cannot become visible
if one deals with each branch of production separately. It is impossible to study labor and wages without studying implicitly commodity prices, interest rates, profit and loss, money and credit, and
all the other major problems. The real problems of the determination
of wage rates cannot even be touched in a course on labor. There are
no such things as "economics of labor" or "economics of agriculture."
There is only one coherent body of economics.
What these specialists deal with in their lectures and publications
is noc economics, but the doctrines of the various pressure groups.
Ignoring economics, they cannot help falling prey to the ideologies
of those aiming at special privileges for their group. Even those
specialists who do not openIy side with a definite pressure group and
who claim to maintain a lofty neutrality unwittingly endorse the
essential creeds of the interventionist doctrine. Dealing exclusively
with the innumerable varieties of government interference with business, they do not want to cling to what they call mere negativism. If
they criticize the measures resorted to, they do it only in order to
recommend their own brand of interventionism as a substitute for

The Place of Economcs in Learning

871

other people's interventionism. Without a qualm they endorse the
fundamental thesis of both interventionism and socialism that the unhampered market economy unfairly harms the vital interests of the
immense majority for the sole benefit of callous exploiters. As they
see it, an economist who demonstrates the futility of interventionism
is a bribed champion of the unjust claims of big business. I t is imperative to bar such scoundrels from access to the universities and
their articles from being printed in the periodicals of the associations
of university teachers.
The students are bewildered. In the courses of the mathematical
economists they are fed formulas describing hypothetical states of
equilibrium in which there is no longer any action. They easily conclude that these equations are of no use whatever for the comprehension of economic activities. In the lectures of the specialists they
hear a mass of detail concerning interventionist measures. They must
infer that conditions are paradoxical indeed, because there is never
equilibrium, and wage rates and the prices of farm products are not
so high as the unions or the farmers want them to be. I t is obvious
that a radical reform is indispensable. But what kind of reform?
The majority of the students espouse without any inhibitions the
interventionist panaceas recommended by their professors. Social
conditions will be perfectly satisfactory when the government enforces minimum wage rates and provides everybody with adequate
food and housing, or when the sale of margarine and the importation
of foreign sugar are prohibited. They do not see the contradictions
in the words of their teachers, who one day lament the madness of
competition and the next day the evils of monopoly, who one day
complain about falling prices and the next day about rising living
costs. They take their degrees and try as soon as possible to get a
job with the government or a powerful pressure group.
But: there are many young men who are keen enough to see through
the fallacies of interventionism. They accept their teachers' rejection
of thc niihampereb market economy. Bur they do not beiieve that
the isolated measures of interventionism could succeed in attaining
the ends sought. They consistently carry. their preceptors' thoughts
to their ultimate logical consequences. They turn toward socialism.
They hail the Soviet system as the dawn of a new and better civilization.
However, what has made many of the present-day universities
by and large nurseries of socialism is not so much the conditions prevailing in the departments of economics as the teachings handed down
in other departments. In the departments of economics there can

872

Human Action

still be found eminent economists, and even the other teachers are
familiar with some of the objections raised against the practicability
of socialism. The case is different with many of the teachers of philosophy, history, literature, sociology, and political science. They interpret history on the ground of a garbled vulgarization of dialectical
materialism. Even many of those who passionately attack Marxism
on account of its materialism and atheism are under the sway of the
ideas developed in the Communist Manifesto and in the program of
the Communist International. They explain depressions, mass unemployment, inflation, war and poverty as evils necessarily inherent
in capitalism and intimate that these phenomena can disappear only
with the passing of capitalism.

5. General Education and Economics
In countries which are not harassed by struggles between various
linguistic groups public education can work very well if it is limited
to reading, writing, and arithmetic. With bright children it is even
possible to add elementary notions of geometry, the natural sciences,
and the valid laws of the country. But as soon as one wants to go
farther, serious difficulties appear. Teaching at the elementary level
necessarily turns into indoctrination. It is not feasible to represent to
adolescents all the aspects of a problem and to let them choose between dissenting views. It is no less impossible to find teachers who
could hand down opinions of which they themselves disapprove in
such a way as to satisfy those who hold these opinions. The party that
operates the schools is in a position to propagandize its tenets and
to disparage those of other parties.
In the field of religious education the liberals solved this problem
by the separation of state and church. In liberal countries religion is
no longer taught in public schools. But the parents are free to send
their children into denominational schools supported by religious
communities.
However, the problem does not refer only to the teaching of religion and of certain theories of the natural sciences at variance with
the Bible. It concerns even more the teaching of history and economics.
T h e public is aware of the matter only with regard to the international aspects of the teaching of history. There is some talk today about the necessity of freeing the teaching of history from the
impact of nationalism and chauvinism. But few people realize that
the problem of impartiality and objectivity is no less present in deal-

The Place of Economics in Learning
ing with the domestic aspects of history. The teacher's or the textbook author's own social philosophy colors the narrative. The more
the treatment must be simplified and condensed in order to be
comprehensible to the immature minds of children and adolescents,
the worse are the effects.
As the Marxians and the interventionists see it, the teaching of history in the schools is tainted by the endorsement of the ideas of old
liberalism. They want to substitute their own interpretation of history for the "bourgeois" interpretation. In Marxian opinion the
English Revolution of 1688, the American Revolution, the great
French Revolution, and the nineteenth-century revolutionary movements in continental Europe were bourgeois movements. They resulted in the defeat of feudalism and in the establishment of bourgeois supremacy. The proletarian masses were not emancipated; they
merely passed from the class rule of the aristocracy to the class rule
of the capitalist exploiters. T o free the working man, the abolition
of the capitalist mode of production is required. This, contend the
interventionists, should be brought about by Sozialpolitik or the New
Deal. T h e orthodox Marxians, on the other hand, assert that only
the violent overthrow of the bourgeois system of government could
effectively emancipate the proletarians.
It is impossible to deal with any chapter of history without taking
a definite stand on these controversial issues and the implied economic doctrines. The textbooks and the teachers cannot adopt a
lofty neutrality with regard t o the postulate that the "unfinished
revolution" needs to be completed by the communist revolution.
Every statement concerning events of the last three hundred years
involves a definite judgment on these controversies. One cannot avoid
choosing between the philosophy of the Declaration of Independence
and the Gettysburg Address and that of the Conzmunist Manifesto.
The challenge is there, and it is useless to bury one's head in the sand.
On the high school level and even on the college level the handing
d ~ w i iof historical and economic knowiedge is virtually indoctrination. T h e greater part of the students are certainly not mature enough
to form their own opinion on the ground of a critical examination of
their teachers' representation of the subject.
If public education were more efficient than it really is, the political parties would urgently aim at the domination of the school
system in order to determine the mode in which these subjects are
to be taught. However, general education plays only a minor role in
the formation of the political, social, and economic ideas of the rising generation. The impact of the press, the radio, and environmental

Human Action

874

conditions is much more powerful than that of teachers and textbooks. The propaganda of the churches, the political parties, and the
pressure groups outstrips the influence of the schools, whatever they
may teach. What is learned in school is often very soon forgotten
and cannot carry on against the continuous hammering of the social
milieu in which a man moves.

6. Economics and the Citizen
Economics must not be relegated to classrooms and statistical offices
and must not be left to esoteric circles. It is the philosophy of human
life and action and concerns everybody and everything. It is the
pith of civilization and of man's human existence.
T o mention this fact is not to indulge in the often derided weakness of specialists who overrate the importance of their own branch
of knowledge. Not the economists, but all the people today assign
this eminent place to economics.
All present-day political issues concern problems commonly called
economic. All arguments advanced in contemporary discussion of
social and public affairs deal with fundamental matters of praxeology
and economics. Everybody's mind is preoccupied with economic doctrines. Philosophers and theologians seem to be more interested in
economic problems than in those problems which earlier generations
considered the subject matter of philosophy and theology. Novels
and plays today treat all things human-including sex relations-from
the angle of economic doctrines. Everybody thinks of economics
whether he is aware of it or not. In joining a political party and in
casting his ballot, the citizen implicitly takes a stand upon essential
economic theories.
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries religion was the main
issue in European political controversies. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in Europe as well as in America the paramount ques+:A"

ronmron+a+;rm rrn~mremnnt
~mrr~xr
rrrxrfilnLrn177+:rm T - A r T r
v r s u r u r u r v ~IJUJ
a 1 a v a v l u u a l l . I uua

L ~ W U VY a> A r y ~ b a b r ~ r c r u
r v~w

IVY

:c

Y IL

is the market economy versus socialism. This is, of course, a problem
the solution of which depends entirely on economic analysis. Recourse to empty slogans or to the mysticism of dialectical materialism
is of no avail.
There is no means by which anyone can evade his personal responsibility. Whoever neglects to examine to the best of his abilities
all the problems involved voluntarily surrenders his birthright to a
self-appointed elite of supermen. In such vital matters blind reliance
upon "experts" and uncritical acceptance of popular catchwords and

The Place of Econowtics in Learning

875

prejudices is tantamount to the abandonment of self-determination
and to yielding to other people's domination. As conditions are today, nothing can be more important to every intelligent man than
economics. His own fate and that of his progeny is at stake.
Very few are capable of contributing any consequential idea to
the body of economic thought. But all reasonable men are called upon
to familiarize themselves with the teachings of economics. This is,
in our age, the primary civic duty.
Whether we like it or not, it is a fact that economics cannot remain an esoteric branch of knowledge accessible only to small groups
of scholars and specialists. Economics deals with society's fundamental problems; it concerns everyone and belongs to all. It is the
main and proper study of every citizen.

7. Economics and Freedom
The paramount role that economic ideas play in the determination of civic affairs explains why governments, political parties, and
pressure groups are intent upon restricting the freedom of e c o n p i c
thought. They are anxious to propagandize the "good" doctrine
and to silence the voice of the "bad" doctrines. As they see it, truth
has no inherent power which could make it ultimately prevail solely
by virtue of its being true. In order to carry on, truth needs to be
backed by violent action on the part of the police or other armed
troops. In this view, the criterion of a doctrine's truth is the fact
that its supporters succeeded in defeating by force of arms the champions of dissenting views. I t is implied that God or some mythical
agency directing the course of human affairs always bestows victory
upon those fighting for the good cause. Government is from God
and has the sacred duty of exterminating the heretic.
It: is useless to dwell upon the contradictions and inconsistencies
of this doctrine of intolerance and persecution of dissenters. Never
befwe has the wor!d known ssch a & v d y c o i i ~ ~ i v e d
sysrem of
propaganda and oppression as that instituted by contemporary governments, parties, and pressure groups. However, all these edifices
will crumble like houses of cards as soon as a great ideology attacks
them.
Not only in the countries ruled by barbarian and neobarbarian
despots, but no less in the so-called Western democracies, the study
of economics is practically outlawed today. The public discussiqn of
economic problems ignores almost entirely all that has been said by
economists in the last two hundred years. Prices, wage rates, interest

876
Hvrnan Action
rates, and profits are dealt with as if their determination were not
subject to any law. Governments try to decree and to enforce maximum commodity prices and minimum wage rates. Statesmen exhort
businessmen to cut down profits, to lower prices, and to raise wage
rates as if these were dependent on the laudable intentions of individuals. In the treatment of international economic relations people
blithely resort to the most nai've fallacies of Mercantilism. Few are
aware of the shortcomings of all these popular doctrines, or realize
why the policies based upon them invariably spread disaster.
These are sad facts. However, there is only one way in which a
man can respond to them: by never relaxing in the search for truth.

XXXIX. ECONOMICS A N D T H E ESSENTIAL PROBLEMS
OF HUMAN EXISTENCE
I.

Science and Life

T is customary to find fault with modern science because it ab-

from expressing judgments of value. Living and acting man,
Iwe stains
are told, has no use for Wertfreiheit; he needs to know what he
should aim at. If science does not answer this question, it is sterile.
However, the objection is unfounded. Science does not value, but
it provides acting man with all the information he may need with
regard to his valuations. It keeps silence only when the question is
raised whether life itself is worth living.
This question, of course, has been raised too and will always be
raised. What is the meaning of all these human endeavors and activities if in the end nobody can escape death and decomposition? Man
lives in the shadow of death. Whatever he may have achieved in the
course of his pilgrimage, he must one day pass away and abandon
all that he has built. Each instant can become his last. There is only
one thing that is certain about the individual's future-death. Seen
from the point of view of this ultimate and inescapable outcome, all
human striving appears vain and futile.
Moreover, human action must be called inane even when judged
merely with regard to its immediate goals. It can never bring full
satisfaction; it merely gives for an evanescent instant a partial removal of uneasiness. As soon as one want is satisfied, new wants spring
up and ask for satisfaction. Civilization, it is said, makes people
nnO_rer herniise it mi~ltlpliestheir wishes 21ld &PS net senthe, hut
r' ------kindles, desires. All the busy doings and dealings of hard-working
men, their hurrying, pushing, and bustling are nonsensical, for they
provide neither happiness nor quiet. Peace of mind and serenity cannot be won by action and secular ambition, but only by renunciation and resignation. The only kind of conduct proper to the sage
is escape into the inactivity of a purely contemplative existence.
Yet all such qualms, doubts, and scruples are subdued by the
irresistible force of man's vital energy. True, man cannot escape
death. But for the present he is alive; and life, not death, takes hold

878

Humaa Action

of him. Whatever the future may have in store for him, he cannot
withdraw from the necessities of the actual hour. As long as a man
lives, he cannot help obeying the cardinal impulse, the e'lan vital.
It is man's innate nature that he seeks to preserve and to strengthen
his life, that he is discontented and aims at removing uneasiness, that
he is in search of what may be called happiness. In every living being there works an inexplicable and nonanalyzable Id. This Id is the
impulsion of all impulses, the force that drives man into life and
action, the original and ineradicable craving for a fuller and happier
existence. It works as long as man lives and stops only with the extinction of life.
Human reason serves this vital impulse. Reason's biological function
is to preserve and to promote life and to postpone its extinction as
long as possible. Thinking and acting are not contrary to nature; they
are, rather, the foremost features of man's nature. The most appropriate description of man as differentiated from nonhuman beings
is: a being purposively struggling against the forces adverse to his
life.
Hence all talk about the primacy of irrational elements is vain.
Within the universe the existence of which our reason cannot explain, analyze, or conceive, there is a narrow field left within which
man is capable of removing uneasiness to some extent. This is the
realm of reason and rationality, of science and purposive action.
Neither its narrowness nor the scantiness of the results man can obtain within it suggest the idea of radical resignation and lethargy. N o
philosophical subtleties can ever restrain a healthy individual from
resorting to actions which-as he thinks-can satisfy his needs. I t
may be true that in the deepest recesses of man's soul there is a longing for the undisturbed peace and inactivity of a merely vegetative
existence. But in living man these desires, whatever they may be, are
outweighed by the urge to act and to improve his own condition.
Once the forces of resignation get the upper hand, man dies; he does
not rtrn into a plant.
I t is true, praxeology and economics do not tell a man whether
he should preserve or abandon life. Life itself and the unknown forces
that originate it and keep it burning are an ultimate given, and as
such beyond the pale of human science. The subject matter of
praxeology is merely the essential manifestation of human life, viz.,
action.

Essential Problems of Human Existence
2.

879

Economics and Judgments of Value

While many people blame economics for its neutrality with regard to value judgments, other people blame it for its alleged indulgence in them. Some contend that economics must necessarily
express judgments of value and is therefore not really scientific, as
the criterion of science is its valuational indifference. Others maintain that good economics should be and could be impartial, and that
only bad economists sin against this postulate.
The semantic confusion in the discussion of the problems concerned is due to an inaccurate use of terms on the part of many
economists. An economist investigates whether a measure a can bring
about the result p for the attainment of which it is recommended,
and finds that a does not result in p but in g, an effect which even
the supporters of the measure a consider undesirable. If this economist states the outcome of his investigation by saying that a is a
bad measure, he does not pronounce a judgment of value. H e merely
says that from the point of view of those aiming at the goal p, the
measure a is inappropriate. In this sense the free-trade economists attacked protection. They demonstrated that protection does not, as
its champions believe, increase but, on the contrary, decreases the
total amount of products, and is therefore bad from the point of
view of those who prefer an ampler supply of products to a smaller.
I t is in this sense that economists criticize policies from the point
of view of the ends aimed at. If an economist calls minimum wage
rates a bad policy, what he means is that its effects are contrary to
the purpose of those who recommend their application.
From the same point of view praxeology and economics look
upon the fundamental principle of human existence and social evolution, viz., that cooperation under the social division of labor is a more
efficient way of acting than is the autarkic isolation of individuals.
Praxeology and economics do not say that men should peacefully cooperate within the fraiiie of societai bonds; they mereiy say that men
must act this way if they want to make their actions more successful
than otherwise. Compliance with the moral rules which the establishment, preservation, and intensification of social cooperation require is not seen as a sacrifice made to a mythical entity, but as the
recourse to the most efficient methods of action, as a price expended for the attainment of more highly valued returns.
It is against this substitution of an autonomous, rationalistic and
voluntaristic ethics for the heteronomous doctrines both of intuitionism and of revealed commandments that the united forces of

880

Human Action

all antiliberal schools and dogmatisms direct the most furious attacks
They all bhme the utilitarian philosophy for the pitiless austerity
of its description and analysis of human nature and of the ultimatc
springs of human action. It is not necessary to add anything morc
to the refutation of these criticisms which every page of this book
provides. Only one point should be mentioned again, because on the
one hand it is the acme of the doctrine of all contemporary pied
pipers and on the other hand it offers to the average intellectual a
welcome excuse to shun the painstaking discipline of economic studies.
Economics, it is said, in its rationalistic prepossessions assumes that
men aim only or first of all at material well-being. Rut in reality men
prefer irrational objectives to rational ones. They are guided more
by the urge to realize myths and ideals than by the urge to enjoy
a higher standard of living.
What economics has to answer is this:
I . Economics does not assume or postulate that men aim only or
first of all at what is called material well-being. Economics, as a branch
of the more general theory of human action, deals with all human
action, i.e., with man's purposive aiming at the attainment of ends
chosen, whatever these ends may be. T o apply the concept rational
or irrational to the ultimate ends chosen is nonsensical. W e may call
irrational the ultimate given, viz., those things that our thinking can
neither analyze nor reduce to other ultimately given things. Then
every ultimate end chosen b y any man is irrational. It is neither more
nor less rational to aim at riches like Croesus than to aim at poverty
like a Buddhist monk.
2. What these critics have in mind when employing the term
rational ends is the desire for material well-being and a higher standard
of living. I t is a question of fact whether or not their statement is true
that men in general and our contemporaries especially are driven
more by the wish to realize myths and dreams than by the wish t o
improve their material well-being. Although no intelligent being
could fail to give the correct answer, we may disregard the issue.
For economics does not say anything either in favor of or against
myths. It is perfectly neutral with regard to the labor-union doctrine, the credit-expansion doctrine and all such doctrines as far as
these may present themselves as myths and are supported as myths
by their partisans. It deals with these doctrines only as far as they
a;e considered doctrines about the means fit for the attainment 01
definite ends. Economics does not say labor unionism is a bad myth.
It merely says it is an inappropriate means of raising wage rates for
all those eager to earn wages. I t leaves it to every man to decide

Essential Problems of Human Existence

881

whether the realization of the labor-union myth is more important
than the avoidance of the inevitable consequences of labor-union
policies.
In this sense we may say that economics is apolitical or nonpolitical, although it is the foundation of politics and of every kind of
political action. W e may furthermore say that it is perfectly neutral
with regard to all judgments of value, as it refers always to means
and never to the choice of ultimate ends.

3. Economic Cognition and Human Action
Man's freedom to choose and to act is restricted in a threefold way.
There are first the physical laws to whose unfeeling absoluteness man
must adjust his conduct if he wants to live. There are second the
individual's innate constitutional characteristics and dispositions and
the operation of environmental factors; we know that they influence
both the choice of the ends and that of the means, although our
cognizance of the mode of their operation is rather vague. There is
finally the regularity of phenomena with regard to the interconnectedness of means and ends, viz., the praxeological law as distinct from
the physical and the physiological law.
The elucidation and the categorial and formal examination of
this third class of the laws of the universe is the subject matter of
praxeology and its hitherto best-developed branch, economics. The
body of economic knowledge is an essential element in the structure
of human civilization; it is the foundation upon which modern industrialism and all the moral, intellectual, technological, and therapeutical achievements of the last centuries have been built. It rests
with men whether they will make the proper use of the rich treasure
with which this knowledge provides them or whether they will
leave it unused. But if they fail to take the best advantage of it and
disregard its teachings and warnings, they will not annul economics;
they wiii stamp out society and the human race.

Prepared in 1954 by Vern Crawford for the 1949 first
edition of Human Action. This index is more complete
than the one included in the book itself.
influenced by past action, 502-510
A
in passing of time, ch. 18, pp.
Ability-to-pay principle
476-520
in fixing wage rates, 8 11-8 12
insecurity and, 847-849
in taxation, 73 1-732
marginal utility and, 119-1 24,632
Abnormality, 95
meaning of, 11,26,28,42, 59,92
see also, Irrationality
monetary calculation as tool of,
Absolute, 28, 70, 72
ch. 13,pp. 230-232
Abstinence, reward of, 842n
originary
interest and, 524
Abundance, 234-2 37
practice of, 7-1 0
see also, Saving; Scarcity
prerequisites of, 13-1 6
Acceleration principle, 581-583
on happiness, 14-1 5
Accounting
capital, 231,260-264,468,488,
on instincts and impulses, 15-1 6
511,517
purposeful, 11- 13
cost, 336347
requisite of, 22-23,480-487
method of, 2 14,301
righteousness of, 7 19-725
Accounts, foreign exchange equalizaroutine and, 46-47
tion, 458459,781
science and, 6, 2 1, 30, 5 1, 57
Accumulation, capital, 465,487-490,
selfish, 243,674
5 11-5 1 4 , sl8n, 840-847
social cooperation and, see, CoopActing man, ch. 1, pp. 11-29
eration, social
Action, human, Part 1, pp. 11-142
temporal relation between,
analysis of, ch. 4, pp. 92-98
102-104,490
as an ultimate given, 17-18
theory of, 4-7
backwardness of science of, 664n
thinking and, 24, 177, 584n
calculative, 199-200
tool of, ch. 13, pp. 230-232
categories of, 64, 196
uncertainty and, ch. 6, pp.
causality and, 22-23
105-1 18,249
changing f e a ~ s e sof, 18,4647,223
value
judgment and, 17,491
differs from psychology, 12
within framework of society, ch. 7,
economic calculation and, 232
pp. 119-142; Part 2, pp. 143-200
economic cognition and, 88 1
see
also, Praxeology; Rationalism;
emotional, 16
Understanding; Valuation;
ends and means of, 70,92-94,
Want-satisfaction; World view
201-202,208,476
Adams, Thomas Sewall, 523n, 734n
epistemological problems of, 4-7;
Adjustment, period of, 648-650
ch. 2, pp. 30-71
Advertising, 3 16-3 19,378n
exchange and, 97-98
see also, Propaganda
goals of, 15, 3 15
Age of Reason, 69
history and, 59
individual and, 4547,403,719-725 Aggression and destruction, 169-1 73

Human Action

884

Agreements
barter, 796-799
bilateral exchange, 794-796
clearing, 472, 796
Agriculture
monopoly and, 367
New Deal and, 236,3 84
subsidies and, 365,60011, 656
Alter ego, 23-26
American Institutionalism, 4, 755
Amonn, Alfred Otto, 63 1n
Amortization of taxes, 640
Analogies, 114
Anarchism, 148-149,191,240,256,
248n, 579-580
Ancestors, 3, 36, 145
Anderson, Benjamin McAlester, 406n
Animals
reaction to purposeful action,
11-13,16
use of, 624
Anteriority and consequence, 99
Anthropomorphism, 69
Antimonopoly party, 383
Apologists, 48
see also, Propaganda
A posteriori theory, 3 1,41
Appraisement and valuation, 328-3 32
Apriorism
methodological, 35,65
of praxeology, 32-36,64-65,407
reality and, 38-41
reasoning of, 38,3 18
science of, 48
Aquinas, Thomas, 723
Arbitration, 770

Autarky, 163, 26711, 314, 322,743,
824-826
Authority, importance of, 284,321
Autistic economy, 195-196,244-245
Autocracy, 647,686
Automatic, economic meaning of, 725
Averages, Computation of, 223

B
Backwardness, technological, 504-505
Bailey, Samuel, 220
Baker, John Randall, 496n
Balance of payments, 447449,453455
Balance sheets, 2 13
Balkania, 797
Ballistics, 77
Banking School, 436-437,441
Banknotes, 441-445
Banks and banking
booms and, 559
British, 43 9
cartels of, 444
central, 457,462
currency expansion and, 789n
European, 442
Federal Reserve Act of 1913,566
fiduciary media and, 43 1
free, 4 4 0 , 4 4 1 4 5
international, 473
interventionism and, 437,444
liberalism and, 440441
loans, 568
private, 462
Swiss, 462,463
see also, Credit expansion; Cycle
theory; Malinvestment; Money;
A r i c t n t l e , -7 0 4 R 4.*"
qn
Trade
------.--.
"Barbarous relics," 468
Artists, 241n
see also, Genius
Barone, Enrico, 697
Barter
Asceticism, 28-29,87,178-180
agreements, 796799
Assisi, St. Francis D', 156
fiction, of value and prices, 202-206
Association
human process of, 147n
Bastiat, FrCdCric, 147n, 827
Ricardian law of, 158-163, 168, 174 Beard, Charles and Mary, 62511
Atheist, 147n
Behaviorism
Atomic bomb, 828
animal versus man, 16
Austria
conscious versus unconscious, 11
economists of, 4,120,492-493
criticism of. 7
Post Office Savin~s
Service of. 442
u
purpose~,'2627
.)

Index
Bentham,Jeremy, 174, 192-193,670,
827,830
Berdyaew, Nicolas, 67 1n
Bergrnann, Ernst, 204n
Bergson, Henri, 33n, 49, 100n
Bernard, Claude, 28n
Bernoulli, Daniel
doctrine de mensura sortis, 125-1 26
Betting, 115-116
Beveridge, William Henry, 764
Bias, 48, 686
see also, Valuation
Bilateral exchange agreements,
794-796
Bimetallism, 468469,775-776
Birth control, 663
Bismarck, Otto, 363, 364
Bodin, Jean, 232,817
Bohm-Bawerk, Eugen, 121,202n,
3 11,477,478,479,484-486,523,
524-525
Bonald, Louis, 860
Bonaparte, Louis Napoleon, 509,662
Bonar, James, 664n
Bondage, 197,624-630,817,835
Bonds
contractual and hegemonic,
196-199,280,281,497,461,841
government, 226
Bookkeeping, 231,301
Booms
characteristics of, 550-562
crack up, 424,433
economic progress and, 573,
576-578
end of, 783
generation of, 78%
industry and, 557
investments and, 574
see also, Credit expansion; Cycle
theory; Depressions
Bourgeoisie, 9, 74,78, 81, 268,605
Brentano, Lujo, 618
Bretton Woods Conference, 475
Bribery, 273
British, see, Great Britain
Briining, Heinrich, 855
Brunner, Emil, 671n
Buddhism, 28

885

Bureaucratic management, 300-307
Burke, Edmund, 860
Business
calculation, 301
fluctuations, 583
forecasting, 649,866-868
good will and, 376
New Deal plan to control, 815
outlays, 242n
production and, 489
propaganda, 316-3 19
risk-taking and, 106, 108, 112, 115,
805-807
socialist control of, 257
see aho, Entrepreneurs; Interventionism

Caesarism, 182n
Cairnes,John Elliott, 204, 627n
Calculation
business, 3 01
economic, see, Economic calculadon in Soviet Russia and Nazi
Germany, 698-699
lack of precision in, 225n
monetary, ch. 13, pp. 230-232
valuation and, 97; ch. 11, pp.
201-2 12
see also, Accounting; Mathematics;
Measurement
Cannan, Edwin, 532n
Capacity, unused, 391,576-578
Capital
accounting, 23 1,260-264,468,
488,511,617
accumulation of, 465,487-490,
51 1-514,518n, 840-847
circulating, 557
consumption, 261,s 11-5 14,846
convertibility of, 499-502,505,5 10
fixed, 557
flight, 515
foreign, 493-495,497499
goods, 263,292,293,487-490,
493,499-502,505,510
income and, 260-261,482
investment, 342,369,378,499
labor and, 637

886

Human Action

maintenance, 260-264,s 11-5 14,
844-845
marginal productivity of, 293,632
market, 543
praxeology and, 482,s 12
stock exchange and, 5 14-5 17
transfer, 513
volkswirtschaftliche, 518
see also, Money; Production
Capitalism
British, 617
campaign against, 257,46 1
economic calculation and, 23 1
effects upon, 283,664,803
entrepreneurs and, 2 54,461,502
evaluated, 3 10
evolution of, 465
Marxian analysis of, 78,6 12, 64411,
690,860
modern, 587
pacemakers of, 8-9,615
poverty and, 832
production and, 9,495,611
results of, 61 1
saving and, 527,53 1,769
socialism and, 672-678,687, 712
standard of living and, 165,750,833
subsistence and, 601
views of, 264-270
war and, 824
see also, Liberalism; Market economy
Carlyle, Thomas, 9,645
CarteIs, 362-366,444, 593
Case probability, 110-1 15
Cash holdings
demand for, 378n, 399,414,426,
517,566
neutralization of changes in,
412413
purchasing power and, 408,
412413,423
size and composition of, 4 4 5 4 7 ,
460
Cassel, Gustav, 19511
Cassirer, Ernest, 38n
Caste system, 837
Catallactics
competition, 117,274-277,
278-279,669

defined, 2 35,3 24,642
delimitation of, 233-235
functional integration of, 252-256
good will and, 377
impoverishment and, 562,574
inflation and deflation, 420
labor unions and, 585,771-773
land and, 634n
logical versus mathematical,
347-354
money and, 397,430,432,442
or economics of the market, Part 4,
pp. 233684
prices and, 329, 375
problem of, 3,7, 10,203,604
reasoning of, 572
scope and method of, ch. 14, pp.
233-257
unemployment and, 576-577,
595-598
see also, Capitalism; Economics;
Market economy; Rent
Causality, 22-23,25, 99, 106,208
Central Bank of Issue, 442
Cernuschi, Henri, 443
Chamberlin, Edward H., 319n
Change
action and, 220
evolutionary, 267
forces behind, 352
goods induced, 416-419
market situations and, 2 13
measurement of, 223-224
money relations and, 545-547
notion of, 99
purchasing power and, 203,
416-425; 428
see also, Action, human
Charismu and leaders, 150,155
Charity, 242,600, 833
Chasles, Philarste, 192, 193n
Cheyney, Edward Potts, 41n
Child labor, 610,612,615,740-741
Chinese history, 836
Choosing, 3, l i , 45,87,94, 120-127,
193,242
see also, Free will; Valuation
Christianity, 37,719
see also, Morality; Religion

Index
Churchill, Winston, 855
Ciccoti, Ettore, 627n
Circulation Credit Theory, 204,430,
567-573
Citizens, economics and, 874-875
Civil War, American, 825
Civilization
ancient, decline of, 761-763
destiny of, 10,825
liberalism and, 8, 837
primitive, 36,145,600
private property and, 264,679
progress of, 85,87,600,645,813
see also, History; Savings
Clark, John Bates, 4, 255n,496n
Class conflict, 670-671
Class interests, 5, 8 1
Class of wants, 123
Class probability, 107-1 10
Classical economists
achievement of, 23 2
capitalism and, 9
error of, 62, 121,633,678
formation of prices and, 62-64
pacemakers of capitalism, 8-9, 615
profit concept of, 532
teachings of, 174
theory of value and, 2,63, 121,
206,485
trade and, 274
Clearing agreements, 472,796
Clientele, bank, 43 1
Cockaigne, 70
Coercion, governmental, 7 1, 149,
180,283,718
Cognition, 38,584n, 881
Cohen, Morris R., 38n,86n, 643n
Collectivism, 42-43, 145-1 53, 772
see also, Marxism; Socialism
Colonial regime, 497
Commercial legislation, 2 14
Common man, 46,192-193,611,
616-617
Communion, mystic, 166167
Communism
effect of, 64-41
Second International, 152
see also, Marxism; Socialism
Communist Manifesto, 605

887

Comparative cost, law of, 158-163
Competition
biological, 273-274, 663
catallactic, 117,274-277,278-279,
669
free, 275
goodwill and, 377
imperfect, 357, 378
labor and, 625
monopolistic, 357-3 78
prices and, 357, 3 58
restriction of, 278-279,373-374
social, 274
Compulsion, governmental, 7 1,149,
189,283,718
Computation of interest, 533-534
Comte, Auguste, 72-73, 151
Concatenation
defined, 105,324
market and, 252,330,441,566,604
Conception and understanding, 51-58
Confiscation
philosophy of, 800-801
redistribution and, ch. 32, pp.
800-807
taxation and, 802-807
Conflicts (and harmony) of interests,
ch. 24, pp. 660-684; 686
Connexity
among occupational groups, 590
of prices, 3 88-3 89
see also, Catallactics; Market economy
Conquest, 645446,817,828
see also, War
Consequence and anteriority, 99
Conservation, 652-653
Consistency (Constancy), 103-104
Constituent Assembly, 284n
Consumers
business propaganda and, 3 1 6 319
choices of, 63
demand of, 241,495,553
goods, 93-94,330,487
policy312, 315
prices and 328, 390
service to, 227
sovereignty of, 270-272,297,305,
308,495,724
surplus and, 385

Action
Consumers
value judgment and, 328
see also, Entrepreneurs; Market
economy
Consumption
affected by monopoly prices,
381-384
capital, 261,481,511-514, 846
government interference with,
727-729
production and, 354,427
see also, Underconsumption
Continental currency, 42 5
Contraction, credit, 564-567
Contractual bonds, 196-1 99,280,497
Contracyclical policies, 792-794
Control
foreign exchange, 794-796
of supply, in monopoly, 357
population, 663-669
price, 752,756763,822
qualitative credit, 790
rationing, 757,822
rent, 759-761
see also, Interventionism; New
Deal; Planning
Conventionalism, 39
Convertibility of capital goods,
499-502,505,510
Cooperation
human, 143-145,157,663,712
international monetary, 473475
social,2,147n, 179, 184, 196,280,
285,668; Part 5, pp. 685-71 1;
830; see also, Action, human
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 58, 186
Cspyrigh, 3 82-3 83,557-5500,
676-677
Corn-hog cycle, 583
Corn Laws, 82
Corporations, 303-304,532n,
703-704
Corporativism and syndicalism, ch. 33,
pp. 808-816
Cosmology, 18, 192,634
Cost
accounting, 336-347
comparative, 158-163
entrepreneurial, 341

external, 650-656
of production, 340,367
of restriction, 737
phenomenon of Valuation, 393-394
prices and, 97,349
real, 393,632
reduction, 344
shipment, 450
see also, Economic calculation; Market economy; Money
Crack-up boom, 424,433
Cranks, monetary, 186
Creative genius, see, Genius
Credit
circulation, 430,567-573
commodity, 430
contraction, 564567
expansion, see, Credit expansion
manipulation, currency and, ch. 3 1,
pp. 774-799
money, 42 5426,432n
qualitative control, 790
Credit expansion
creation of, 434,439n
definition of, 43 1,568,787
effect of, 548-562,771,787-792
gold standard and, 470,473
interest, trade cycle and, ch. 20, pp.
535-583
see also, Cycle theory; Deflation;
Depression; Inflation; Malinvestment; Money
Creditors
unpopularity of, 537-5 38
versus debtors, 536,777, 785
Currency
Continental, 425
credit manipulation and, ch. 3 1, pp.
774799
debasement, 774775
deposit, 443
devaluation, 462-463,781-787
government, 774777,784
School, 204,435,437 439,568-569
theory, 559n
see also, Fiats; Legal tender; Money
Cycle theory
contracyclical policies, 792
corn-hog, 583

Index

889

monetary or circulation credit, 204,
see also, Credit expansion; Cycle
567-573
theory; Deflation; Inflation;
nonmonetary, 551-552,578-583
Malinvestment
sunspot, 579
Deproletarianization, 665
trade, 204; ch. 20, pp. 535-583; 788 Destruction and aggression, 169-1 73
see also, Credit expansion; DeflaDevaluation and currency, 462-463,
tion; Depression; Inflation
781-787
Devil, the, 51
D
Dialectical materialism, 79-84
Dickinson, Henry Douglas, 702n,
Darwinism, 170,173-175
706n
DaVanzati, Bernardo, 232
Dictatorship, 113,647
Debasement, currency, 774-775
see also, Government; TotalitarianDebt
ism
abatement or aggravation of,
Dietz,
Frederick Charles, 617n
777-779
Dietzgen, Eugen, 74n
public, 226-229,843-845
Differential rent, 632
Debtors and creditors, 536,777, 785
Discount rate and external drain, 459
Deduction by reasoning, 38
Deflation, 419421,428,564-567,779 Discrimination
of prices, 385-388
see also, Cycle theory; Depression;
see also, Valuation
Money
Disequilibrium, 42 8
Deists, 69
Disproportionality
of trade cycle,
Deity, 1, 151
581-583
Demand
Distribution, 255,335,391,800
consumer, 241,553
see
also, Consumers; Entrepreneurs;
elasticity of, 55, 349
Prices
for money, 398-402
Disutility of labor, see, Labor, disutilfor Swedish products, 793n
i ty of
measurement of, 349
Dividends, corporation, 532n
monopoly of, 380-381,591-593
supply and, see, Supply, demand and Division of labor, see, Labor, division of
Dorn, Walter Louis, 614n Democracy
Douglas, Clifford Hugh, 186
case for, 76n, 150, 846
Douglas, Paul, 349
eighteenth-century, 174
Dridzo, Solomon Abramovich,
elections in, 647n
(Lozovsky, A., pseud.), 76511
industrial, 28 1,809
majority rule in, 76, 149, 153, 189, Dualism, 17-18,7 12
Duopoly, 359-360
193,647n
Durable goods doctrine, 58 1
market, 271,678
Duration
of serviceableness, 476477,
Depletion of natural resources, 135x1,
479
383,635,652-653
Dynamics, 258, 353
Depression
contracyclical policy, 792
E
creation of, 204n,423,43 1,560,
579,791
East versus West, 84,495,665,836
effect of, 573
Eclecticism, 185
of 1929,849
Econometrics, 348,349
under totalitarianism, 562-563
Economic autarky, 267n,3 14

890

Human Action

Economic calculation, Part 3, pp.
praxeology and, 1-3,92,95,497,
879,881
201-232; ch. 26, pp. 694-711
prediction of, 105, 117,866
capitalism and, 2 31,260,488, 5 11
privileges and, 81, 313,658-659,
limits of, 2 15-2 18
742
market and nonmarket and, 206,
problems of human existence and,
210-212
ch. 39, pp. 877-881
money and, 215,225,230,260
procedure of, 64-69
problem of, 207-2 10,345
profession of, 865-866
results of, 42 1-422
public opinion and, 537, 859-860
socialism under, ch. 26, pp. 694-7 11
quantitative, 55-57,118,347-349
sphere of, ch. 12, pp. 2 13-229
realism and, 646
theory of, 199-232,260,421-422,
restriction and, 749-75 1
692-7 11,856
revolt against, 9,67-68; ch. 3, pp.
valuation without, ch. 11, pp.
72-91; 755-756
20-212
Ricardian, see, Ricardo, David
see also, Mathematics; Measurescarcity and, 93,236237, 525
ment; Quantitative economics
singularity of, 858-859
Economics
society and, Part 7, pp. 858-881
armchair, 9
specialization of, 69, 870
backwardness of, 7-8,56,664n, 865
study of, 3,64,491,863-865
bourgeois, 78
teaching of, 868-874
calculation, see, Economic calculatheory of, 6-10,202
tion
universities and, 868-872
citizens and, 874-875
value judgment and, 10,2 1,295,
cognition of, 205,881
256,879-881
defined, 10,22Sn,266,881
war, ch. 34, pp. 817-828
denial of, 4, 7,2 l,23 5-237, 643
see also, Catallactics
effects, long-run and short-run,
Economists
82-83,294,649,650,744,787,
Austrian, 4,120,492-493
844
English, 493n
education and, 872-874
laissez-faire, 615
epistemological character of, 4;
Marxian criticism of, 9
ch. 2, pp. 30-71
mathematical, 25 1, 354, 396,410
external, 650-656
metaphors in language of, 114,
freedom and, 875-876
117,272-273,456-457,725-726
government policy and, 239,467
profession of, 865
history and, 51, 66,266, 327,426,
see also, Classical economists
502,603,863-865
Economy
law of, 755-756
autistic, 195,244-245
learning and, ch. 38, pp. 863-876
changing, originary interest in,
logical method of, 2 5 1,347
531-533
mathematical method of, 25 1,257,
direction of, 270
330,347-354,374-376, 396,
English, 9, 147
697-698,706711
mixed, 259-260,7 12
nondescript character of, ch. 37,
progressing, 252,292-296,411
pp. 858-862
retrogressing, 192,252, 296-297
objectives of, 6, 185,203, 354
Robinson Crusoe, 206
of market society, Part 4, pp.
233-684
Russian Soviet, 260
philosophy of laymen, 464
stationary, 251-252,256-257,292

Index
see also, Entrepreneurs; Evenly
rotating economy; Imaginary
construction; Market economy;
Planning
Eddington, Arthur Stanley, 57n, 2 1In
Education
economics and, ch. 38, pp. 863-876
evaluated, 311
for special work, 620
Egalitarianism, 173
Ego, 11,23-26,44
Ehrlich, Paul, 700
Einfihlung, 50
Einstein, Albert, 39, 102n
Elasticity of demand, 55, 349
Elections, 647n
see also, Voting
Ellis, Howard, 406n
Ely, Richard T, 357n,523n, 724n
Empathy, 50,87
Empiricism, 32, 69
Employer-employee relations, see,
Labor, relations
Ends and means of action, 70,92-94,
201-202,208,476
Engels, Friedrich, 74, 165, 198n,
236n,267,588n,602n, 670
Engineering, social, 112, 113, 783
see also, Interventionism; Socialism
England, see, Great Britain
EngliS, Karel, 2511
Enlightenment, Age of, 240
Entrepreneurs
activities of, 227,230,249,
253-257,324,707
booms and, 550
calculation and, 33 1,345
capitalists and, 502
description of, 254, 288
freedom restricted, 9, 269
good will and, 378
gross market rate of interest and,
536538
in a changing economy, 333 , s 31
investment and, 582
labor market and, 591
mentality of, 33 3,582
monopoly and, 358
operation of, 300,325, 341, 704

89 1

prices and, 333
profit and loss of, 286297,375,
514,531,739n
technology and, 345
term of, 61-62
training of, 311
see also, Consumers; Market economy
Environment and inheritance, 46
Envy, 90
Epicureanism, 15, 147
Epistemological problems, l,4; ch. 2,
pp. 30-71
see also, Knowledge
Equality under law, 838
see also, Inequality
Equations
differential, 8, 35 1, 707-7 11
of exchange, 354,396,410
Equilibrium
prices and, 248, 326,375,411, 706
speculation and, 251,253
want-satisfaction and, 482
Error, fight against, 184-1 87
Ersatz, 925-826
Espinas, Alfred, 3n
Ethics, 15,95, 147, 719-725
Ethnologists, 84
Euclidian geometry, 2 11
Eudaemonism, 15,2 1
Europe
banks and banking of, 442
civilization of, 85
conservation and, 653
Western poverty and, 832
Evenly rotating econmql
consumption and, 482
interest and, 523, 53 1,535
land and, 639n
monopoly and, 41 1,413
prices and, 326,35 1, 375,633,707
production and, 676n, 620
state of rest and, 245-251
see also, Imaginary construction
Evolution, 33, 170, 192,267,485
Exchange
action and, 97-98
autistic, 195-196
bilateral, 794-796

892

Human Action

direct versus indirect, 203,402
equation of, 354, 396,410
foreign, see, Foreign exchange
indirect, 66,203; ch. 17, pp.
395-475
interpersonal, 195-196, 202,245,
322,535
media of, 40,209, 395, 399,
459463,774
ratios, 233, 324,427,449455
theory of, 33n, 410
within society, ch. 10, pp. 195-200
see also, Market economy; Money;
Trade
Exorcism, 37,68
Expansion, credit, see, Credit expansion
Expenditures, public, see, Spending,
public
Experience, 18,25, 39-49,65,69
Experiments, 3 1-32,58-59
Exploitation doctrine, 298,601-606,
766
Export and import
money and, 448,475,785
see also, Exchange; Free trade;
Tariff; Trade
External costs and economies,
650-656
External drain, money and, 437,456,
459,473,569,791
F
Fabianism, British, 755
Fact-finding board, 812
F2ctn57 q~tem,515
see also, Industry; Technology
Fairchild, Fred Rogers, 812n
Fascism, 8 13
Federal Reserve Act of 1913,566
Ferguson, Adam, 198n
Fetter, Frank Albert, 262n, 27111,486,
631n
Feudalism, 817,835
Feuerbach, Ludwig, 15
Fiats, 394,426,432n, 568
see also, Legal tender; Money, paper
Fichte, Johann, 7 17

Fiduciary media, 43041,457,473,
548,551,559,568
see also, Banks and banking; Credit
expansion; Inflation;Money
Final causes, 26
Final state of rest, 246
Finance, public, see, Spending, public
Fisher, I ~ n g ,
205,221,439-440,
486,540
Flaubert, Gustave, 268n
Flexible standard, 781-783,784-786
Flight
capital, 515
into real goods, 424,466467,547
Foch, Ferdinand, 509
Forecasting
business, 649, 866-868
economic, 105, 117
quantitative, 207
Foreign exchange
balance of payments and, 449-45 5
control and bilateral exchange
agreements, 794-796
equalization accounts, 459,781
external drain and, 437,456,459,
473,569,791
free trade and, 452-453
parity theory of, 452
prices and, 5 16
speculation and, 454
see also, Money; Trade
Foreign investments, 493-495,
497-499
Foreign trade, 322,45243,662
Fourier, Charles, 7 1n
France
banks and, 443
foreign exchange and, 516
Revolution of, 28411,425,819
Franklin, Benjamin, 78n
Free banking, 4 4 0 , 4 4 1 4 5
Free enterprise, 83,2 3 0
see also, Freedom; Laissez faire;
Market economy
Free trade
arguments about, 743
British, 8 1-84
foreign exchange and, 452-453
see also, Money; Trade

Index
Free will, 46, 105, 193,644
see also, Choosing; Valuation
Freedom
economics and, 875-876
foes of, 268
preferred, 280
restricted, 9
significance of, 279-285
French Banking Inquiry, 443
French Revolution
consequence of, 42 5,8 19
Constituent Assembly of, 284n
Freud, Sigmund, 35
Frontier, passing of the, 652-653
Fullarton, Principle of, 441
Functional integration, 252-25 6
Futures
market. 256257,324
uncertainty of, 105, 117, 207, 649,
868

Goal, aim for, 476,494
Godwin, William, 71n
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang, 23 1
Gold
iron and, 121
points, 450
standard, 411412,418,425,
456459,468473,571,
776-777,780-781
see also, Money
Good will, 376-380
Goods
capital, 263,292,293,487490,
493,499-502,505,510
consumer, 93-94,128,330,487
induced changes, 4 16-41 9
orders of, 93-94
perishable, 486
prices of, 3 30-3 3 6
producers, 93-94
quality of, 222
G
real, flight into, 424,466-467,547
Galileo, Galilei, 41, 186
Gordon, Mania, 644n
Gambling, 106,108,112,115-116
Gossen, Hermann Heinrich, 124,
Games, 116
331,697
Garbo, Greta, 619
Government
autocratic, 647,686
Geist, 72, 74, 79
bonds, 226,461,841
Genius, 90, 138-140,241n,264,3117
bureaucratic management, 305
657
coercion and, 71, 149, 189,283,718
Geometrical theorems, 38,2 11
currency and, 774-777,784
German Historical School, 81,20211,
functions, delimitation of 715-719
755,756
interference, see, Interventionism
German Reichsbank, 549
liberalism and, 149,283, 321
Germany
majority rule and, 76,149,153,
calculation in, 698-699
189,193,647n
cartels and, 363
market and, ch. 27, pp. 712-729;
conflict with Britain, 812
752-763
demand for Swedish products, 793n
ownership, 259,650
Mark of 1923,425
price determination, see, Prices,
Nazism and, 76, 187,268~1,
determination of
698-699,796799
pattern of socialism, 471,687,
socialistic approach to, 260,265,
713-714,752-753,759
267,563,671n, 689-691
Sozialpolitik, 3 63-3 64, 829
spending, see, Spending, public
Volkwirtschaft and, 319-3 23,2 96,
subsidies of, 365,600,654-655,
513,518,633
737,738
Gesell, Silvio, 787
world, 682,817
Gestaltpsychologie, 45-46, 145
see also, Capitalism; Collectivism;
Giddings, Franklin Henry, 144n
Depressions; Foreign exchange;

894

Human Action

Heraclitus, 172
Herzfeld, Marianne, 464n
Heteronomous ethlcs, 15, 148
Historical method of economics,
66-67
Historical School, 206,267,643,697,
755
Historicism, 4 6 , 267
History
categories of, 202n
Chinese and English, 836
development of, 80
duty of, 618
economic, 5 1,66,266,327,426,
502,603,863-865
human action and, 59
inflationist view of, 463468
lessons from, 41,679
natural and human, 58-59
of capitalism, 9, 264270,495,611
of private property, 264,679
origin of socialist idea and, 685-689
philosophy of, 28
praxeology and, 28, 30-32, 59
scope and method of, 47-5 1
studies, 88
theory and, 604
wages and, 606
H
war and, 645-646
see also, Civilization; Progress
Haberler, Gottfried, 552n, 789n
Hider, Adolf, 76, 84,645,794n
Haller, Karl Ludwig, 860
Hoarding, 78n,399400,5 18-520
Hammond, John Lawrence and
Hogben, Lancelot, 77n
Barbara, 614n, 617
Hohenzollern Electors, 320
Haney, Lewis Henry, 633n
Holistic concepts, 1, 145-1 53, 397
Hansen, Alvin Harvey, 72 5n
Homme moyen, 646
Happiness, 14-1 5
-Homo agens, i4
Harmony
conflict of interests and, ch. 24, pp. Homo oeconomicus, 62-64,241,646
Homo sapiens, 14,24, 33
660-684
predetermined, 240
Hot money, 461-463
Hayek, Friedrich August, 277n, 278n, Hours of work, 133,599,608,740-741
395n, 493n, 512n, 52511, 57811,
Human action, see, Action, human
705n,71 In, 76711,84411
Human existence, ch. 8, pp. 143-176
ch. 39, pp. 877-881
Hazlitt, Henry, 655n
Hume, David, 3, 73, 147, 204,
Heckscher, Eli Filip, 660n
413416,662
Hedonism, l 5 , 2 1
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 72, Husserl, Edmund, 1OOn
Hutt, William Harold, 591n, 594n
74,80,151,690,717,828
Hegemonic bonds, 196-1 99,281,497 Hypotheses, 115

Money; Socialism; Taxation;
Totalitarianism
Grading, valuations, 97, 126,201, 33 1
Great Britain
bank laws of, 439
businessmen of, 633
capitalism in, 617
Chinese history and, 836
Currency School and, 204,563
deflation and, 565
economists of, 493n
economy of, 9,147
Fabianism of, 75 5
free trade and, 81-84
Labor Party of, 726
monetary problems and, 778
socialism in, 812, 855
Speenhamland system and, 600n
Greenback period, 469
Gregory, T.E., 470n
Greidanus, Tiardus, 427n
Gresham's Law, 232,432n, 447,469,
754,775-777,780
Grillparzer, Franz, 139
Grotius, Hugo, 817
Guild socialism and corporativism,
812-813

Index
I
Id, 12,878
Ideal types, 5962,252-256, 194
Ideas, role of, ch. 9, pp. 177-194
Ideology
influence of, 644
Marxian connotation of, 5,74,
78-79,82,207
ruling, 188
traditionalism and, 191-1 92
world view and, 178-1 87
see also, Laissez faire
Imaginary construction
autistic, 244
exchange and, 202
method of, 237-238
socialist society and, ch. 25, pp.
685-693
state of rest and, 245-25 1
stationary economy and, 25 1,256,
2 92
see also, Equilibrium; Evenly rotating economy
Import and export
of money, 448,475,785
see also, International Monetary
Fund; Trade
Impoverishment and booms, 562,574
Impulses, 15-1 6
Imputation, physical, 491
Income
capital and, 260-261,482
national, 218,292n
prices and, 390-3 91
problems of, 255n
wealth and inequality of, 285-286,
--.
,.-* ,../5l-/5L, 85&84/
Index numbers, 22 1-224,439
Indian philosophies, 28
Individualism
methodological, 41-43
versus collectivism, 152, 726
Individuals
action of, 4547,403,719-725
changing features of, 46-47
market and, 311-3 16
monetary calculation and, 230
nature and, 1
society and, 143, 164-165, 178-179
--a

895

Industrial democracy, 28 1,809
Industrial Revolution, 8,613-619
Industrialism
process of, 619
Western, 497
Industry
booms and, 557
concentration of, 341
infant, 505-507
location of, 506-507,s 10
modern, 587
processing, 341
Inequality
of men (inborn), 90, 134, 157,
173-174,837-838
of wealth and income, 285-286,
731-732,836-847
see also, Equality under law; Privileges; Restrictions
Infant industries argument, 505-507
Inflation
catallactics and, 420
credit expansion and, 568
deflation and, 419-421,428,
564-567,779
domestic, 452
effects of, 545,547-563
engineering of, 783
European, 424
passive, 570n
progressing, 424-425
see also, Credit expansion; Cycle
theory; Depression; Money
Inflationists
radical, 236
view on history, 463-468
i ~ e r i t a n c eand environment, 46
Insecurity, 847-849
Instincts, 15-16,26-28, 169
Institutionalism, 62,66,206,636n,
643,697,755
Insurance, 109, 1l2n
Integration of catallactic function,
252-256
Interdictions, 13
Interest
computation of, 53 3-5 34
credit expansion and trade cycle,
ch. 20, pp. 535-583

896

Human Action

defined, 523
originary, 238,427,521,523-529,
53 1-533,545-547,548,639,
842n
phenomenon of, 52 1-523
problems of, 53 5-5 36
productivity theory of, 263-264,
522-53 1
rate, ch. 19, pp. 52 1-534
gross, 535-542,564-567
height of, 529,53 1
market, 536-568
money relation and, 455459
neutral, 536 , s 38-539
unpopularity of, 569-570
Interests
class, 5, 81
harmony and conflict of, ch. 24,
pp. 660-684
"rightly understood," 669-678
vested, 269, 276, 334, 848
Interference, see, Interventionism
Interlocal exchange rates, 449455
International capital market, 498
International monetary cooperation,
473-475
International Monetary Fund, 475,
785
International organization, 365,
683-684,817
International trade, 160,392,446,
737,741
Interventionism
acquisition of wealth and, 3 10
advocates of, 365
banking and, 437! 444
depression, contracyclical policies
and, 792
confiscatory, 802
consumption and, 727-729
crisis of, ch. 36, pp. 851-857
end of, 854-857
harvest of, 85 1
labor and, 610
legal tender legislation and,
777-779
market economy hampered, Part 6,
pp. 712-857
market reaction to, 756-761

method of, 3 12
monetary matters and, 468, 570
patterns of, 7 13-7 15
planning, 10411, 113,672,696,725,
784
policy of, 193,471,713-715
price structure and, ch. 30, pp.
752-773
production and, 655,736,800
public works and, 792
superhuman, 146
taxation and, 227; ch. 28, pp.
730-735
war and, 82 1
see also, Cartels; Government;
Nationalism; New Deal; Socialism
Intolerance, 148
Intuition, 84
Inventions, 508
Investments
boom and, 574
capital, 342, 369, 378
convertibility and, 499,505,s 10
foreign, 493-495,497-499
government, 226,841
inconvertible, 342, 391,576
malinvestment, 391,556-558,561
overinvestment, 556-5 58
reluctance toward, 582
saving and, 5 17-520
see also, Capital goods; Entrepreneurs; Interest, rate; Production,
factors of; Security; Speculating
Investor, mobility of, 514-5 17
Iron
gold and, 12 1
law of wages, 20n, 601,739
Irrationalism, 5, 6, 7, 12, 18, 89,95,
102,104,173,185,314,880
see also, Rationalism

J
James, William, 156
Jevons, William Stanley, 121,479,
485,494,579
Judgments, see, Relevance, judgments
of; Valuation
Just prices, 620, 72 1, 722

Index
Justice
notion of, 147,716
social, 671,719, 849-850
TT
I\

Kaufmann, Felix, 39n, 10311
Kautsky, Karl, 137
Kempis, Thomas i , 2 17
Kepler, Johames, 58
Keynes,John Maynard, 429,464,467,
468n, 546n, 737,771,785,787,846
Keynesians, ideal of, 474
Knight, Frank Hyneman, 67n,289n,
489n, 84411
Knowledge, 5,32,84,207,584
see also, Education; Epistemological
problems
Ku Klux Klan, 773
L
Labor
baiting, 740
capital and, 637
catallactics and, 585, 771-773
child, 610,612,615,740-741
commodity character of, 590,605,
628-629
competition and, 625,768
compulsory, 62 8
conditions, 613
distribution of, 134
disutility of, 65-66,l3 1-137,584,
588,606-613
division of, 65, 82, 131, 143-145,

147,157-164,258,266,465,
588,606,669,824,827
p y ~ O ~ ~ p l ~ ~
584-585
i ~ . ~ ~ ,
free, 135n, 62 8
hours of, 133,599,608, 740
human, 131-137,141,489
immediately gratifpg, 137-1 3 8
international division of, 622,824,
826
interventionism and, 610
introversive, 137n, 584-585
joy and tedium of, 585-589
legislation, 3 13-314, 363, 739,
746-749
market, 584-630

897

nonspecific factor of, 133-1 3 5,
389,590
Party of Britain, 726
price of, 602
productivity of, 605, 674, 67.511,
768
professional, 140, 234
quantity and quality of, 619
relations, 80, 691
Russian versus American, 67511
selective function and, 309
slave, 624-630
socialism and, 137,674
supply of, 136,606-61 3
theory of, 584-63 0
unions, 373-374, 585, 591,605,

618,764-767,771-773,783,
786-787,808,811
United States, 675n
wages for, 589-593,615,619,673
see also, Production, factors of
Laissez faire, 9, 613, 615, 616,
725-727,741,820,824,837
Land
appraisal versus improvements,
637n
as ,tanding room, 638-639
capital accounting and, 262-263
catallactics and, 634n
evenly rotating economy and, 639n
external costs and, 650
ownership of, 308
preromantic ages and, 641
prices of, 390, 523, 619, 630,
639-640
reform, 801
submarginal, 636-638
theory of, 632-641
utilization of, 634-636,652
see also, Property
Landauer, Carl, 699n
Oskar, 702n
Langlois, Charles Victor, 50n
Laputania, 8
Laski, Harold, 726
Lassalle, Ferdinand, 84211, 846
Latin Monetary Union, 469
Laurn, Bernhard, 267n
Lavoisier, Antoine Laurent, 186

898

Human Action

Law
Lend-lease, 475
economic
Lenin, Nikolai, 76,645
association, 158-163, 168, 174
Lerner, Abba Ptachya, 803n
comparative cost and, 158-163
Level of prices, 223,395-396,410
Gregory King, 232
LCvy-Bruhl, Lucien, 36-37
marginal utility, 119-1 27,632
Liberalism
of the market, 755-756
advocacy of, 149-1 57,183
of wages, 20n, 601,739
banlung problems and, 44e441
participation, 36
eighteenth-century, 173
government and, 149,283,321, 719
population, 2011, 129,174-175,
philosophy of, 685,837
663-669
praxeology and, 153-1 55
psychophysics, 125
pseudo, 153
return, 127-1 30, 338-347,663
religion
and, 155-1 57
Ricardian, 158-163, 168, 174
see
also,
Market
economy
see also, Gresham's Law
Liberals
equality under, 838
ihsions of, 157,193,860-862
moral and natural, 146,173-1 74,
self-styled, 28 1
716,755,835,837
Liberty, see, Freedom
of human action, 755
Licenses, 366, 658-659
see also, I'raxeology
Life and science, 877-878
of nature (physical), 755
Living costs, 466
see also, Sciences, natural
see a h , Costs; Standard of living
regarding property, 65 1
Loans
rule of, 199
bank, 568
see also, Liberalism; Legislation
contract for, 1 9 6 199,280,28 1,
Laymen, economic philosophy of, 464
497,524
Leadership, 138, 155,256, 311, 325
government, 226,461
League of Nations, 683-684,79211,
interest rate and, 455
82 1
intergovernmental,
499
Learning, see, Education
market,
524,542-545,672
Leather, tariff on, 742
money, 430
Lebenrraum, 320
short and long term, 400,441, 541
Legal tender, 432n, 445,447,469,
war, 228-229
774,777-779
see also, Credit; Credit expansion
see also, Currency; Fiats; Money,
Location of industries, 499, 506-507,
paper
510,514
Legislation
Locke, John, 13n
commercial, 2 14
Logic, 25,33-38, 74,86,99, 184185
Corn Laws, 82
Logical positivists, 699n
labor, 313-3 14,363,739, 746-749
Long run, 82-83,294,649
legal tender, 774,777-779
Lorenz, Max Otto, 523n, 734n
licenses and, 366, 658-659
Losses, see, Profits and losses
Peel's Act of 1844,569
Lottery enterprise, 109
prolabor, 3 13-3 14,738-741,
Lozovsky, A. pseud. (Dridzo, Solo746-749
see also, Copyrights; Laws; Patents
mon Abramovich), 76511
Leibniz, Gottfiied Wilhelm, 13n
Lutz, Harley, 73 1-732
Leisure, 131
Lysenko, ~ i o f i r nDenisovich, 49611

Index

899

characteristics of, 258-260,678
M
competition and, 117,308-3 11
Machine Age, 837
consumers and, 270,328,390
Machlup, Fritz, 5 17n, 570n, 790n
data of, ch. 23, pp. 642-659
MacIver, Robert Morrison, 144n
democracy
and, 27 1,678
Magic, 37
denial of, 320
Maistre, Joseph, 860
economic calculation and, 2 10-2 12
Majority rule, 76, 149, 153, 193,647n
features
of, ch. 15, pp. 258-323
Malinvestments, 39l,556558,56l,
function
of, 392,757
580
government and, ch. 27, pp.
see also, Booms; Credit expansion;
712-729,752-763
Depressions
hampered,
Part 6, pp. 712-857
Malthus, Thomas Robert, 664
individual and, 311-3 16
Malthusian law of population, 20n,
loan, 524,542-545,572
129,174-1 75,663-669
labor
and, 584-630
Man
money
and, 398,459,543
acting, ch. 1, pp. 11-29
nonmarket economy and, 206
common, 46,192-193,611,
phenomena, 2,233,312,469
616-617
price, 246, 335, 388, 756
economic, 62
process, 2 16, 330, 352
inequality of, 134, 157, 173-174,
production in, 488
837-838
profit and loss in, 660462,701
irrational, 314
public expenditures and, 22 1,734,
member of society, 41
85 1
primitive, 33,3 638,145,600
pure, 238-241
rational, 19
reaction to government interferreal, as a datum, 646-647
ence, 756-761
vegetative, 28-29
selective process of, 308-3 11,700
see also, Action, human
social cooperation and, Part 5, pp.
Management, 301-305,306,703-704,
685-7 11
810,855
socialism and, 335,672,687, 7 12
see a h , Entrepreneur; Government;
stock exchanges and, 514-5 15
Interventionism; Ownership
theory and data of, 642-643.672
Manchester School, 239,819,824, 827
versus welfare principle, ch. 35, pp.
Mandats tem'toriam, French (of
829-850
1796), 425
wage rates in, 619-620
Mangoldt, Hans Karl Emil, 289n
war and, 82 1-824
Marginal productivity of capital, 293
see also, Capitalism; Cycle theory;
Marginal utility, 119-127,632
Distribution; Entrepreneurs;
Margins, doctrines of, 337
Exchange;
Interventionism;
Mark, German (192 3), 42 5
Liberalism; Monopoly, prices;
Market democracy, 27 1
Private property
Market economy
Marketability,
398,459
advantages of, 667
Marshall, Alfred, 3851-1
affected by trade cycle, 572-583
Marshall, John, 733
autonomy of, 752
Man, Karl
capital, 543
case against, 829-83 1
communism and, 644n
catallactics or economics of, Part 4,
doctrine of, 74,78-82,84,216n,
pp. 233-684
497,605,689491,861

900

Human Action

socialistic approach to government,
260,265,267,671n
terms of, 268
theory of
capitalism, 612,690, 860
economists, 9
unionism, 765
wages and exploitation,
601-606,612
Marxism
analysis of capitalism, 612, 690, 860
class struggle and, 67 1n
commercial crises of, 579
criticism of economists, 9
ideology, 5,74,78-79,82,207
polylogism and, 75
production and, 141
productivity of labor and, 67Sn
socialism, 260,265, 267,67ln,
689-69 1
theoryof, 5,152,236,670-671,873
Mass production, 384,587,616
Materialism, 17, 73,79-84, 154,
193-194,217
Mathematics
equation of exchange, 393,410
gambling and, 106
geometric theorems of, 38,2 11
logic and, 99
method of economics, 25 1,257,
330,347-354,374-376,396,
410,697-698,706-711
probability, 107
treatment of theory of monopoly
prices, 374-376
see also, Calculation; Economics;

of value, 121-122,205
process of, 2 10
see also, Calculation; Economic calculation; Mathematics; Quantitative economics
Mechanicalism, 23
Media of exchange, 40,209,395,398,
459463,774
see also, Money
Medical prognoses, 110
Meliorism, 192-1 94,690-69 1
Memory, 34-3 5
Menger, Carl, 121, 123,3 3 1,402404
Mensheviks, 152
Mental disability, 185-1 87
Mercantilism, 53,448,453,660
Metals, precious, 225
see also, Gold; Silver standard
Metamorphosis, 34
Metaphors in language of economists,
114,117,272-273,456457,725-726
Metaphysics, 17,25,31, 32, 145-153
Methodenstreit,4
Meyers, Albert, 647n
Meyerson, mile, 38n
Might, l88-191,644
see also, Majority rule
Migration
wages and, 622
war and, 820,821,828
Mill, John Stuart, 107, 204,413-416,
493n, 674n
Mind and reasoning, 12, 34,50,72
Minority rule, 190, 191n
Mintage, 774
MP.IC~I~P-P~+
M~FCF,
Li~dwi~,
187n, 265nj 307nj
- ----398n, 413n, 485n,498n,674n, 70511
Maupassant, Guy de, 268n
Mitchell, Billy, 509
Mauretania, 747
Mitchell,
Margaret, 62511
Maximization of profits, 128,241-244
Mixed
economy,
259-260,712
Maxwell,James Clark, 77
Moloch, 160,719
McDougall, William, 16n
Monetary areas (blocs), 782
Meaning, 26,28,42,59,92
Monetary calculation, ch. 13, pp.
Means and ends of action, 70,92-94,
230-232; 39511,421-422,488,517
201-202,208,476
Monetary
cooperation, international,
Measurement
473475
of changes, 223-224
Monetary entries in economic calculaof elasticities of demand, 55,249
tion, 213-215
of purchasing power, 22 1
A.A-cA.,-

L
A
.
.
-

Index

90 1

Monetary Fund, International, 475,
supply of, 225, 398-402,43 1, 551,
785
571
theory of, 186,204, 395,469, 552,
Monetary or circulation credit theory,
578
204,430,567-573
trade and, 446,455
Monetary Union, Latin, 469
value, 348,406,408,425-427
Money
see also, Banking School; Banks and
bimetallism and, 468469, 775-776
banking; Credit; Currency;
British problem of, 439,568,778
Deflation; Exchange; Fiduciary
capital and, 517-520
media; Gold; Gresham's Law;
certificate, 430,432,442
Inflation; Legal tender; Silver
checkbook, 442
standard
commodity, 425
Monism, 17,25,712
credit, 425426,432n
Monometallism, 469
defacto standard, 469
see also, Gold; Silver standard
demand for, 398-402
economic calculation and, 2 15,225 Monopoly
agriculture and, 367
errors in popular doctrine of,
competition, 357,378
395-398
connotation of, 277-278
exchange economy and, 415
copyrights, 382-383,657-658,
expenditure, 22 1
676-677
features of, 47 1
entrepreneurs and, 358
fiat, 394,426,43211, 568
failure, 368-3 70
flexible standard, 781, 784
for cereals, by Swiss government,
force of, 413416,535
388
government interference with, 468,
gain, 369, 375
570
incomplete, 359
government issue of, 409
licenses, 366, 658-659
hot, 461-463
limited-space, 3 72
import and export of, 448
local versus urban, 370
increase in quantity of, 409
margin, 361,366367
loans, 430
of demand and supply, 380-3 8 1,
market, 398,459,543
591-593
media of exchange, 40,209,395,
patents, 360, 363, 382-383,
398,459463,774
507-509,657-658,676-677
mintage, 774
prices, 278, 354-376, 381-384,
monometallism, 469
676,760-761
neutral, 203,250. 395-396,
profits and, 358
413416
requirements of, 358-368
origin of, 402-404
trend toward, 363,383-384,677-678
paper, 409,418,780
Montaigne, Michel, 660, 682
prices, 202,206,216
purchasing power of, 22 1, 399,
Morality
405413,416-419,464,606
precepts of, 15,95, 146, 173,716,
quantity theory of, 38,55,232,402
719,755,835
profits and, 297
relation, 408,414,427429,
restraint, 175,664,719, 763
455459,544-547
see also, Social justice; Welfare prinsound, 776
ciple vs. Market principle
stabilization of, 220
substitutes, 425-426,429431,433, Morgenstern, Oskar, 117n
447.461.469.473
,
,
,
Mussolini, Benito, 84,645, 814n

902

Human Action

Mysticism, 80, 166
Myth of the soil, 640-641
N
Nagel, Ernest, 643n
Napoleon, see, Bonaparte, Louis
Narcotics, 728-729
National Recovery Administration,
365,815
Nationalism
economic, 183,682-683,819-82 1,
827-828
economic theories and, 6
German, 3 19
religion and, 148
see also, Interventionism; Socialism
Natural law, 146, 173-1 74, 716, 719,
755,835
see also, Morality, precepts of; Science, natural
Natural resources, 13511, 383,635,
652453,681
Natural sciences, 59, 173-176,207,
634,664n
Nature
definition of, 64411
individual and, 1
Nazism, 76,187,268n, 319,698-699,
796-799
Needs, scale of, 96-97
Neo-Mercantilism, 323
Neosocialists, 702
Neumann, John, 117n
Neurath, Otto, 699n
Neurotics, 12
New Deal
agricdtural policies, 236, 384
National Recovery Administration,
365,815
plan to control business, 8 15
pump priming, 552
Newtonian mechanics, 4
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 139,
171,645,690
Nihilism, 4
Nominalism, 42
Nonmarket economy, 206
Nordic-Aryanism, 52
NumCraire, 250,414

0
Objective use-value, 2 1, 120, 127
Offspring, limitation of, 663-669
Oligopoly, 359-360
Omniscience, 7,69, 70
Oncken, August, 660n
One-reserve system, 462
Ontological facts, 86
Oppenheimer, Franz, 76
Orientals
customs of, 839
noncapitalistic, 665
poverty and, 832
Originary Interest, see, Interest, originary
Overinvestment, 55 6 558
see also, Malinvestment
Ownership
government, 650
of production, 259
private, 308,678, 719
P
Pacemakers of capitalism, 8-9,615
Pain and pleasure, 15
Palmer, Robert, 819n
Panic, see, Depression
Panphysicalism, 7, 8, 17-18, 23-24
Panslavism, 838
Papi, Ugo, 8 14n
Paraguay, 83 1
Pareto, Vilfiedo, 697, 71 I n
Parity, foreign exchange and, 452,
457,781
Participation, law of, 36
Party programs, 181-184
Pascal, Blaise, 106
Passfield, Lady, see, Webb, Beatrice
Passive inflationism, 570n
Past, economic role of, 502-510
Patents, 360-363,382-383,507-509,
657458,676677
Pathology, 20
Pax Britannica, 191
Payments, balance of, 447-449,
453-455
Peace
durable, 8 19-82 1,827-828
war and, 147-148,680-684,817

Index

903

Peel's Act of 1844, 569
Pompadour, Madame, 650
Perfection, 70,415
Poor relief, 242,600,833-836
Period of adjustment, 648-650
Population
comparative, 623-624
Period of production, 476,484,485,
Malthusian law of, 20n, 129,
487,490-496,526,544
174175,663-669
Period of provision, 253,478,490496
optimum
size of, 129,663,668
Perversity, 95
Positivism,
4,
17-18,26,3 1,56
Phenomena
Post Office Saving Service, Austrian,
complex, 31
442
historical, 33
Poverty,
242,600,670,831-836
market, 2,233,312,469
Power
mental grasp of, 50
lust for, 802-803
of interest, 52 1-523
role of, 188,643-645
of valuation, 393
Pragmatism, 23-24,32,126n
psychological, 483
Praxeology
scientific research and, 17
attack upon, 5
social, 157, 275, 287
capital and, 482,5 12
Philosophy
causality and, 22
background of
changes and, 352
epistemological problems, 30-7 1
concept
of the present, 100-101
human action and, 11-29
definition
of, 3, 12,28,32,142,235
introduction to, 1-10
economics and, 1-3,92,95,497,879
confiscation, 800-801
formal and aprioristic character of,
history of, 28
32-41,64,407
revolt against reason, 72
history and, 28, 30-32, 100
Phlogiston theory, 41
liberalism and, 153-1 55
Physiocracy, 9
limitations on concepts of, 69-71
Physiology, 96
method of, 2 37
see also, Natural sciences
objective of, 185
Pierson, Nikolaas Gerard, 697
polylogism and, 77-84
Pigou, Arthur Cecil, 84411
prediction of, 117- 118
Pioneers, 138
principles of, 402
Planning
psychology and, 12,123-127,
advocates of, 672
483-485
argument for, 725
reality and, 39,92,642
for freedom, 725
research, 18-2 1
partial, 259
science of, 7, 10, 15, 36,3940, 51,
self-contradictory, 104n, 696, 784
64,68,160,173,642,647
see also, Interventionism; Socialism
socialism and, 69 1-693
PoincarC, Henri, 39n
temporal character of, 99-100
Politics
see also, Action, human; Sciences
British, 9, 147
Precapitalistic era, 615
goal of, 315,649,737,835
Predetermined harmony, doctrine of,
organizations of, 182
240
terminology of, 272-273
Prediction
see also, Interventionism; Privileges;
business, 649,866-868
Restrictions
economic, 105, 117
Polylogism, 5,6, 7, 75-89
quantitative, 207

904

Human Action

Prelogical &dung, 34-38
Preromantic age, land and, 641
Present, praxeological concept of,
100-101
Pressure groups, 269, 314-3 15,
865466,870
see also, Interventionism
Prices, ch. 16, pp. 324-394
booms and, 550
catallactics and, 329, 375
ceilings, 757
changeability of, 2 18-220,294
classical theory of, 62
competitive, 354,358
connexity of, 388-389
control, 336,752,756763,822
costs and, 97, 349
determination of, 270, 33 1,394,
423,701
discrimination, 327n, 3 85-3 88
economic progress and, 466
equilibrium, 248, 326,707
final, 246-247
foreign exchange and, 516
for government services, 7 3 8
formation of, 62-64,2 13,388
income and, 390-39 1
interference with, ch. 30, pp.
752-773
just, 721, 722
labor, 602
land, 390,523,633,639-640
level of, 223,395-396,410
market and, 246,335,390,756
maximum and minimum, 753,757
money, 202,206,2 16
monopoly, 278,354376,381-384,
676,760-761
nonmarket, 392-394
of goods of higher order, 330-3 3 5
parity, 445,457,781
premium, 428,467,538-542,545,
548-549
processing, 324-3 28
production and, 391-392,632
rise in, 299,408,420,466, 55 1
statistics, 326328, 347-349
theory of, 245
value and, 97,202-206,390,632
wages and, 690,72 1,722

see also, Consumers; Entrepreneurs;
Socialism, economic calculation
under
Primitive man, 3638,145,600
Private property, 264, 308-309,
650451,678-680,719
Privileges
economic effects of, 80,8 1,
312-3 13,658-659,742
restriction of, 741-749
Probability
case, 110-1 15
class, 107-1 10
meaning of, 106107
numerical evaluation of, 113-1 15
Producers' goods, 93-94
Producers' policy, 3 12-3 13, 3 15
Production
anarchy of, 240,256,579-580
big-scale, 3 38, 367
businessman and, 489
consumption and, 354,427,736
cost of, 340, 367
direction of, 140-142,259,297
diverted by tariffs, 737
expansion of, 298,554
factors of
booms and, 566,576-578
labor and, 589,610
original, ch. 22, pp. 63 1 4 4 1
prices, 331, 336,522,694,757
produced, see, Goods, capital
utilization of, 93, 338, 391, 576
for use, 297
good will and, 376-380
government ownership of, 259,736
improvement in methods of, 9,613
interventionism and, 655,736,800
labor and, 136,605,606,674,675n
market economy and, 488
Marxians and, 141
mass, 384, 587, 616
means of, 207,705
nonhuman original factors of, ch.22,
pp. 63 1-641
period of, 476,484,485,487,
490496,526,544
prices and, 391-392,612
process of, 288,292,478,488,499

Index
restriction of, ch. 29, pp. 736751
taxation and, 800
transition of, 6 13n
war, 82 1
see also, Capital; Saving; Technology;
Wealth
Productive forces, 9
Productive or unproductive activities,
244-245
Productivity theory of interest,
263-264,522-53 1
Profession
economic, 865-866
forecasting, 866-868
see also, Education
Profits and losses
accounting, 2 13,701
difference between, 97-98
driving power of, 3,297
entrepreneurial, 286-297,375,
393,514,531,739n
good will and, 379
illusory, 42 1,546547
maximization of, 128,241-244
monopoly and, 358
psychic, 287
sharing, 8 11
source of, 291,633,660-662,868
theory of, 252,343,347,532,
804-807
wartime, 823
Progress
booms and, 573
rising prices and, 466
Progressing economy, 252,292-296,
41 1
Prohibition, American, 728
Proiabor poiicies, 3 i 3-3 i4, 738-741,
746-749
see also, Interventionism
Proletarian, 74, 88
Promonopoly party, 384
Promoters, 255-256,300-107,309,
324,325,333,582
see also, Entrepreneurs
Propaganda
anticapitalist, 5 87
business, 316-3 19
Property
legal definition of, 650-651,678

private, 264, 308-309, 650,
678430,719
right, 650-656
social and economic meaning of,
679-680
see also, Government; Investments;
Land; Ownership; Production,
factors of
Prosperity, 429,793n
Protectionism, 81-84, 160-161,
3 13-314,361-365,505,738,
742-749
see also, Foreign exchange; Tariff;
Trade
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph, 186
Provision, period of, 253,478,
490496
Prussian Historical School, 4,603
Pseudo-liberalism, 153
Psychoanalysis, 12
Psychology
instinct of, 15
praxeology and, 12, 123-127,
483485
Psychopaths, 12, 185-187,315-316
Psychophysics, 125-126
Public debt, 226229,843-845
Public finance, see, Spending, public;
Taxation
Public opinion, economics and, 537,
859-860
Public ownership, see, Government
Public utilities, 372-373
Public works, 792
Purchasing power
capital accumulation and, 5 18n
changes in, 203,416425,428
measurement of, 22 1
of money, 221,396,399,40541 3,
416419,464,606
parity theory of foreign exchange,
452
stabilization of, 220,416
wage argument, 298-299
see also, Money
Pythagoras, 38,79

Q
Quality of goods, 222

906

Human Action

Quantitative economics, 55-57, 118,
347-349
see also, Measurement
Quantitative prediction, 207
Quantity theory of money, 38,55,
232,402
Quasi-market, 701-706

Relevance
causal, 120
judgments of, 50,55,57-58,88
see also, Valuations
Religion
capitalism and, 671-672, 719, 849
conflicts among, 183-184
individual and, 14, 18, 95
liberalism and, 155-1 57
Marxism and, 82
Smith, Adam, and, l47n
society and, 145
see also, Morality; Philosophy
Rent, 521,63 1-640,759-761
Research
praxeological, 18-22,863

R
Racism, 6,75,84-87, 90
Rappard, William E., 684n
33, 39, 67, 72, 84, 122,
3 16
Rationalism, 15, 16, 18,78n,79,89,
102,103-104,146,175,880
see also, Action, human; Irrationalscientific, 5, 6, 7, 7, 8,
ism
Reserve fund, exhaustion of, 851-854
Rationing, 757,822
Residual rent, 632
Real cost, 393,632
Rest, state of, 245-251
Realism
antagonism of, 42
Restriction
competitive, 278-279,3 73-374
a priori and, 38-41
cost
of, 737
conceptual, 45,145,s 11
economic system of, 749-75 1
economics and, 646
nature of, 736737,837
mental grasp of, 25, 38, 39,65,86,
of production, ch. 29, pp. 736-751
642
privilege of, 741-749
praxeology and, 39,92,642
prize of, 737-741
see also, Action, human
see also, Interventionism; Politics
Realpolitik, 189
Reasoning
Retrogressing economy, 192,252,
296-2 97
age of, 69
Returns,
law of, 127-1 30,3 38-347,
aprioristic, 38, 318
case of, 89-9 1
663
catallactic, 572
Revolution
discursive, 67
ideological, 8, 72-91
experience and, 18,25, 39,65
illegal act of, 284n
human, 50,72,173,177-178
Industrial, 8,613619
methods of, 2
semantic, 268,281,420
mind and, 34
see also, Economics, revolt against
praxeological, 39
Ricardo, David
revolt against, 72-91
gold exchange standard and, 418,
unnatural, 175
780
see also, Action, human
law of association, 158-163, 168, 174
Redemption, 457
philosophy of, 75,79, 147, 174,
see also, Money
49311,602
Redistribution, confiscation and, ch. 32,
rent, 63 1,632,633,636
pp. 800-807
the R. effect, 750n, 767-770
Regression theorem, 40547,423,606 Right
Reichsbank, 549,568
law of, 199

Index
moral and natural, 173-174,7 16,
719,835
property, 650-656
to revolt, 284n
to strike, 773
Righteousness, 26, 173-1 74,716,
719-727,835
Risk-taking, 106, 108, 112, 115,
805-807
see also, Entrepreneurs; Profits and
losses; Speculating
Robbins, Lionel Charles, 10311, 529n
Robinson Cmsoe economy, 206
Romanoff dynasty, 115
Romanticism, 503
Rome
Church of, 6711-1
fall of, 761-763
price control and, 761-763
Rostovtzeff (Rostovtsev), Mikhail
Ivanovich, 762n
Rotating economy, see, Evenly rotating economy
Rougier, Louis, 73n
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 165
Routine, 46-47
see also, Action, human
Rule, 189
see also, Government
Rumania, 493
Ruml, Beardsley, 570n
Ruritania, 8,747
Ruskin, John, 645
Russia
calculation in, 698699
economy of, 260
I-L.

.d L 7 C -

I d U V I C l 3 Ul, U I J 1 1

socialistic pattern of, 713
technology of, 5
S
Sadism, 172,586
Salvioli, Guiseppe, 627n
Samuelson, Paul Anthony, 78711,
Santayana, George, 868n
Satisfaction, see, Want-satisfaction
Saving
advantage of, 487-489,s 12-5 14,
840

907

capitalist, 527, 53 1, 768, 769
forced, 545-547,553-555,573,
842n
investment and, 5 17-520,805
value judgment and, 530
Scale
of needs, 96-97
of value, 94-96, 102-103
Scarcity, 93,236237,525
SchaMe, Albert, 697
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm, 7 17
Scholasticism, medieval, 717
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 28
Schultz, Henry, 349
Schumpeter, Joseph, 354,527n
Schiitz, Alfred, 24n, lOOn
Sciences
aprioristic, 48
definition of, 10,20,65
historical, 47, 59
life and, 877-878
measurement (mathematical), 55,
218,347
natural, 3 1,59, 173-176,207, 634,
664n
psychic, 11
social
criticism of, 8
empirical, 49
see also, Action, human; Economics;
Praxeology; Research
Second International, 152
Security, 612,835, 841,843-844,
847-849
Seignobos, Charles, 50n
Selective process of the market,
3 08-3 11
Selfishness, 243,674
Selling
buying and, 324
price discrimination and, 385-388
Semantics, 268,281,420
see also, Metaphors
Serfdom, 197
Serviceableness
duration of, 476
instinct of, 2 6 2 8
Services, personal, 140-141, 234
Seven Years' War, 6 14n

908

Human Action

Sexual customs, 663
Shipment costs, 450
Short run, 82-83,294,649,650,744,
787,844
Sickness, 165,833
Silver standard, 456,469
Singularism, methodological, 44-45
Sismondi, Jean Charles, 268
Slaves and slavery, 197,624-63 0 , 8 17,
835
Smith, Adam
on employers, combinations, 591n
on paper money, 418,780
on religion, 147n
Smith, Vera Constance, 441n
Social cooperation, see, Cooperation,
social
Social engineering, 113
see also, Planning
Social gains, 365, 599, 607-613,
739-741,750-751,854
Social justice, 671,719,849-850
Social phenomenon, 157,275,287
Social relations, 168-169
Social sciences
criticisms of, 8
empirical, 49
Social security, 613,835, 843-844
Socialism
agrarian, 80 1
British, 812,855
capitalism and, 672-678, 712
champions of, 675n
critics of, 282
depessiorls wider, 563
doctrine of, 689-691
economic calculation under, ch. 26,
pp. 694-7 11
failure to refute theories of, 6
German pattern of, 319,471, 687,
713-714,752-753,759
guild, 812-813
historical origin of, 685-689
labor and, 137
market and, 335,672,687,701,712
Marxism and, 260, 265,267, 671n,
689-691

policy of, 74, 89, 183, 206, 240,
257,259-260,672-678; Part 5,
pp. 685-71 1; 808
praxeological character of, 691-693
problem of, 90,694499
Russian pattern of, 7 13
taxation and, 733-734
theory of value and, 6,206207
war and, 82 1-828
writings about, 503
see also, Collectivism; Interventionism; Planning
Society
action within, ch. 7, pp. 119-142;
Part 2, pp. 143-200
exchange mthin, ch. 10, pp.
195-200
Great, 168-1 69
holistic and metaphysical view of,
1,145-153,397
human, ch. 8, pp. 143-176
individual within, 143, 164-1 65,
178-179
liberal, 149,283,321
place of economics in, Part 7, pp.
858-881
socialist, ch. 25, pp. 685-693
"Utopian," 2, 71,72, 83 1
Sociology
instinct, 15
meaning of, 30n
of knowledge, 5,84,207,584
Soil
conservation, 652-653
myth of, 640-641
see also, Land
Solvay, Ernest, 186
Sombart, Werner, i98n,744n, 837
Sooner or later, 99, 102,480,490,494
Sophocles, 617
Sorel, Georges, 171,645,808
Soul, 26,175
Sovereignty
consumer, 270-272,297,308,724
national, 682
Sozialpolitik, 320, 363-3 64, 829
Spann, Othmar, 679
Specialization, 69, 3 11, 620, 870
Speculating, 58, 112-1 13,251,
253-254,300,324,333,454,582

Index
see also, Entrepreneurs; Investments; Profits and losses;
Risk-taking
Speenhamland system, 600n
Spencer, Herbert, 19811
Spending, public, 22 1, 226229,236,
242n, 734,737,770-771,843-845,
846,85 1; see also, Taxation
Spengler, Oswald, 645
Spinoza, Benedictus, 5
Stabilization, 220-229,416
see also, Currency; Money
Stalin,Josef, 645
Stalinists, 152
Standard of living, 265,3 14,601,665,
739,740,750,860
State of rest
final, 246
plain, 245-246
State and society, 148, 149
Static method, 248-249
Statics, 248, 353
Statism, see, Nationalism
Stationary economy, 251-2 52,
256-257,292
Statistics
average of, 60
economic, 30n, 2 18
of prices, 326328,347-349
Statolatry, 148,226,827,828
Stirner, Max, 151
Stock exchange, 514-5 17,790
Strigl, Richard, 262n, 642n
Strike, right to, 773
Subconscious, concept of, 12
Subjectivism, 3, 21, 57, 64,94
Subsidies, 365,60On, 654656,737,
738
Subsistence
supply of, 484
wages and, 600-606
Sulzbach, Walter, 83511
Superiority, racial, 90
Supply
control of, 3 57
demand and, 62,222,241,324,320,
355,375,385-388,398402,756
labor, 136,591,606613

909

monopoly of, 3 54,280
see also, Money, relation; Money,
supply
Surplus, consumer, 385
Surtax, 853
Sweden, prosperity in, 793n
Switzerland
currency devaluation in, 462
monopoly for cereals and, 388
National Bank of, 462,463
"Sycophants," 5,9,268
Synchronism, 102
Syndicalism and corporativism, 305;
ch. 33, pp. 808-816
Synthetics, 826
I

Tariffs
for protectionism, 361-365,738
infant industries argument,
505-507
leather, 742
outcome of, 742-749
prolabor legislation and, 313-3 14,
746-749
to divert production, 737
see also, Mercantilism; Nationalism;
Protectionism
Tautology, 38
Taxation
ability-to-pay principle and,
731-732
amortization and, 640
burden of, 853
classes of, 734-735
c m f scat=% 802-807
interference by, 227; ch. 28, pp.
730-735; 800
neutral, 730-73 1
objectives
fiscal, 733-734
nonfiscal, 733-744
price for government services, 738
progressive, 803-805,851-854
socialism and, 733-734
surtax, 853
total, 73 1-73 3
Technicians, 300
Technology

910

Human Action

backwardness of, 504-505
improvement in, 8,391,465,504,
509,615
influence of, 207,292,503
opportunity of, 526
Rumania and, 493
Russian, 5
task of, 93, 300,345
unemployment and, 136-1 37,768
see also, Entrepreneurs
Teleology, 23,2 5
Temple, William, 67 1n
Temporal relation between actions,
102-104
Theocracy, 69,150-1 57
Thinking
acting and, 24,177,584n
method of, 230-2 31
prelogical and logical, 34-38
satisfaction of, 584n
see also, Action, human
Time, ch. 5, pp. 99-104
action in passing of, ch. 18, pp.
476-520
economization of, 101-102
element of, 247-248
factor of land utilization, 634-636
maturing, 476
past, present, and future, 100-101
praxeological character of, 99-100
preference, 480-487,489n,
496499
relation between actions, 102-1 04
waiting, 479,490-492
working, 476
see also, Interests
Tird-,, Lotkx G d i e h , 85n
Tooke, Thomas, 443
Tools and machinery, 768
see also, Technology
Torrens, Robert, 602
Total wealth, 2 18
Totalitarianism, 9, 113, 152-153,265,
280,562-563
see also, Collectivism; Socialism
Trade
agreements, 797
ancient. 761
barriers, 274

cycle, 204; ch. 20, pp. 535-583; 788
domestic and foreign, 322,452453
free, 81-84,743
interest, credit expansion and, ch.
20, pp. 535-583
international, 160, 392,446, 737,
741,820,824,828
marks, 361, 377
migration and, 622,820,82 1,828
money and, 446,452,455,
473475,498
Swiss, 388
see also, Foreign exchange; Protectionism; Tariffs
Traditionalism, 191-192,3 11
Transvaluation of values, 170, 172
Trial and error, 700-701
Trotsky, Leon, 71n, 277n
Trotskyists, 152
Truman Administration, 8 12
Truth, 24,28,467

u
Ultimate given, 17-18,20-2 1,25,28,
49-50
Uncertainty, ch. 6, pp. 105-1 18; 249
Underconsumption, 298-299,579
Understanding, 49-58, 61,68,87-89,
112,115,118
Unemployment
catallactic, 576577,595-598
effects of, 770
frictional, 597-598
institutional, 364, 598,605,611,
664-772,783-784,786-787
technological, 136 137, 768
see also, Depress~ons;Maimvestments
Unions, see, Labor, unions
United Nations, 366,683-684,82 1
United States
Civil War, 825
credit expansion and, 568
laborers of, 67.511
lend-lease and, 475
surtax policy of, 853n
war production and, 82 1
Universalism, 42,44-45, 145-1 53
Universities.
economics- and.,868-872
~,
~

Index
Use-value, 12 1
Utilitarian philosophy, 15,2 1, 148,
175
Utility, marginal, 119-127, 632
"Utopians," 2, 70, 72,83 1

v
Valuation (Value judgments)
appraisement and, 87,96, 328-332
change of, 222
conflicts and, 3 15,686
consumer and, 328
dictators and, 113, 647
economics and, 2, 10,21, 206, 295,
356,485,879-881
equal, 480
history and, 47, 56
market, 384
measuring, 121-122,205
money, 405,406,408,425-427
objective use, 21,120, 127
of wealth, 7 10
philosophical, 14, 18,95
prices and, 97,202-206, 328, 390,
632
saving and, 5 30
scale of, 94-96, 102-103
socialism and, 206207
subjective, 3,21,51, 120, 124,243,
328-332,392,632
theory of, 2,63,96, ll9-127,205,
206,351,485,602
time preference and, 480487,
48911,496499
without calculation, ch. 11, pp.
201-212
see also, Action, human; Ideoiogy;
Meaning; Understanding;
World view
Value
flight into real, 547
paradox of, 63,12 1
transvaluation of, 170,172
Vassals, 197,817, 835
Vested interests, 269,276, 334,848
Volkswirtschaft, 3 19-3 23, 396, 5 13,
518,633
Voltaire, Francois-Marie, 662
Voting, 76,150,153,193,271,647n

W
Wages
determination of, 271,739,783
iron law of, 2011,601,739
labor and, 589-593,673
purchasing power argument of,
298-299
rates
expansion of production and,
298,768
furing, 81 1-812
gross and net, 598-600
historical explanation and regression theorem compared, 606
just price and, 620,721, 722
market effect of, 619-620
minimum, 763-773
Prussian Historical School and,
603
real, 364, 546, 605
rise in, 550
subsistence and, 600-606
theory of, 601-606,612,672
work and, ch. 2 1, pp. 584-630
Waiting time, 490-496
Wallace, Henry, 23 6
Walras, LCon, 121
Want-satisfaction, 243, 389, 393,408,
415,476,478,481,484,496,525,
672,674
see also, Action, human; Valuation
War
autarky and, 824-826
capitalism and, 824
causes of, 498-499,680,8 19-82 1,
827-828
Civil, American, 825
detrimental, 175
economics of, ch. 34, pp. 817-823
foreign trade and, 175,662, 820,
824,828
futility of, 827-828
history and, 645-646
interventionism and, 82 1
limited, 8 18
loans, 228-229
market economy and, 82 1-824
migration and, 820,821,828

912

Human Action

peace and, 147-148,680-684
production, 82 1
profits, 823
socialism and, 82 1-828
substitutes, 825
total, 168-169,817-82 1
Wealth
constancy of, 5 11
changes in, 5 18n
division of, 293
evaluated, 3 10
income and inequality of, 285-286,
731-732,836-847
total, 2 18
value of, 7 10
see also, Capitalism; Money; Saving
Webb, Beatrice and Sidney, 272n,
618,814n
Weber, Max, 3011, 126
Weber-Fechner law of psychophysics,
125-127
Welfare principle versus market principle, ch. 35, pp. 829-850
Wells, Herbert George, 662n
We+eibeit, 47-48, 877-880

West versus East, 84,495, 665, 836
Whately, Richard, 3n, 532n
Wicksell, Knut, 486
Wicksteed, Philip Henry, 103n
Wiese, Leopold, 169n
Wieser, Friedrich, 205, 207n
Wilson, Woodrow, 820
Wirtschaftlicbe Staatswissmscbaf2en,62,
603,755-756
Work
of animals and slaves, 624-63 1
wages and, ch. 2 1, pp. 584-630
see also, Hours of work; Labor
World Council of Churches, 671n
World government, 682
see also, International organization
World view
ideology and, 178-187
panmechanistic, 25
Wren, Sir Christopher, 850
Y
Young, Allyn, 523n, 734n
Young, Arthur, 6 17

This Scholar's Edition of Human Action is
printed on 50 lb. acid-fiee Finch Fine paper; it is
set using the Yanson typeface; the case cloth is
Rainbow@ Odyssey, importedfiom the Czech
Republic, a natural-finish, moisture-resistant book
cloth; the endsheets are Rainbow@ antique
soapstone by Ecological Fibers; the signatures are
Smythsewn; the foil is non-tarnishing gold fiom
Nakai International; and the book was produced at
R.R. Donnelley in Crawfordsuille,Indiana.

